I get stuck.I’m feeling pretty muddled right now. I’ve arrived at an impasse. I’m at an in-between stage with the writing of this book, and I must admit, it's thoroughly captivating. I recently received a big edit (filled with useful comments), and I’m racking my brain trying to figure out how to redraft a new and compelling introduction. And here I am, again, unsure of what to say. I’m feeling anxious, a bit nervous. I’m unclear what my next step should be. When I don’t exactly know to where I’m headed, my self-confidence starts to wane. It’s really an uncomfortable place to be. When I’m tangled in this mess, it always amazes me that there are people who have actually learned to embrace and find joy in this part of the process. I can’t help but remember the first time where I felt equally as befuddled. I had just departed from my meeting with the staff at Mosaica Press. The discussion went well. My 20 minute presentation was received with positivity, enthusiasm, encouragement and warm smiles. And although they referred to their staff as a “team,” I left feeling like they were more like family.I was truly stoked to start writing. But like any other beginning, I was filled with both excitement and trepidation. I was hesitant to take my first step forward. I found solace in the fact that I wouldn't be starting the project from scratch. I had a document filled with useful information floating somewhere in the cloud. It was a series of lectures which I had recorded and transposed just a year earlier. 
I peered outside the window of the train, and that’s when it dawned on me. I was struck by an anxious thought: “But now I have to write a book! How does one turn a series of lectures into a book?” Feelings of dread filled my body. I looked outside of myself as if to find the answer, but my thoughts were too muddied to see one. I was in a funk. I hadn’t even begun the project, and somehow had already succeeded to lose track of who I was in the process. 

In truth, I may have felt stuck, but I wasn't really lost. I knew my exact whereabouts. I was wading knee deep in a very familiar location. It was a place that I’d visited many times before and had become accustomed to call: the muddy middle.


“See the piggy, see the puddle, see the muddy little puddle?
See the piggy in the middle of the muddy little puddle?
See her dawdle, see her diddle in the muddy, muddy middle.
See her waddle plump and little, in the very merry middle.” 

If you haven't guessed already, these words are found in the introduction of a children’s book called, The Piggy in the Puddle. The story depicts a family standing around a muddy little puddle. In the middle of the puddle is a little piggy, and her fuddy-duddy parents (and brother) are trying to convince her that it’s in her best interests to remove herself ¬from its sticky influence. She was too happy frolicking about in its muddy, muddy middle to heed their warnings. In order to reprimand her and coax her out, her family waved in front of her a bar of soap. Unswayed by this intervention, she responded by saying, “Oofy-poofy, oofy-poofy — NOPE!” 

The contents of any good book are meant to send a particular message, and while doing so, they often reflect life’s many trials and tribulations. What I didn’t realize, was how much the writing process, itself, mirrors the struggles of normal 
everyday life. And for an author, writing is their life. It’s what consumes most of their thoughts and time. I might have first heard the words ring in a children’s book, but how apropos it was to have stumbled upon such a fitting literary term. By “divine coincidence,” I had also fallen into what other writers refer to as the muddy middle.

There are many stages to the writing process, and just like in real life, it’s not unusual for an author to begin feeling uneasy somewhere along the way. For example, Rohan may have a lot of writing experience under his belt but claims that the “in between” stage still continues to offer him “so much uncertainty.” 

It doesn’t just slow him down in the middle, it tends to surface and exhaust his efforts at various points along the way. Rohan reports, “I still find the phase of writing in between the taking-notes-and-doing-pre-writing stage and the producing-a-reasonably-decent-draft stage and the producing-a-reasonably-decent-draft stage psychologically taxing.” 

When Rohan is caught in the muddy middle, he gets jumbled up and confused. It’s difficult for him to see beyond the chaos, as he describes, “The words are all in a kind of virtual heap and I can’t yet see what order to put them in, or how to choose among them, or how to say properly (clearly, eloquently).” 

However unclear and uncomfortable it may be, with ample experience, Rohan has become wiser to these murky times, stating, “I’m learning to trust my own process more: I know from experience that this muddy middle is a phase of its own.” Believing in the process has helped him to anticipate and become more confident about what may happen in the future, saying, “Eventually, though, I know I will get out of the mess…I can almost see now, too, how the parts will fit together-almost!” In the darkest of times, he has developed the confidence, trusting “that the next phase will come.”

The path to completion is never an easy one. When sculpting her children’s books, Nikki talks about the difficulties that often arise. She’s a prolific writer, and much like Rohan, has managed to become wary of the many pitfalls. She’s learned that at a particular point in the writing process, she will inevitably fall into a rut and lose clarity. “There’s a stage in every writing project where the first draft seems unfinishable,” she says. Due to experience, she knows that the fuzziness will begin to surface around the “50-75% mark.” “By then, I’m frustrated by how slow things are going, feel like I’m never going to finish the first draft,” she reports.

Being wise to this mark has its benefits. Over time, Nikki has learned to find joy and excitement in the buildup: “But just before I get to that dreadful muddy middle where it seems there is no realistic chance I will ever finish writing the first draft, there’s a lovely stage of enthusiasm and ease that last up until the first third is done.” 

I find comfort in Amanda’s simple definition of the muddy middle. She describes it as that place where: “You’re stuck and not sure how to get from point A to point B.”  It’s reassuring to learn that none of us are alone when it comes to stumbling into the muck. We all know what it’s like to lose direction in life at one point or another. 

Joe had just reread Gone with the Wind and recounted how much of the script reflects the difficulties of normal everyday life. The book contains 63 chapters, and he considers the first five as an introduction. He cheekily asks, “So what did Margaret Mitchell fill the 57 chapters in between with? Challenges, obstacles, reversals of fortune for characters.” Let’s be honest. We find excitement in the turbulence of life. We may not always be conscious of it, but much of life takes place smackdab in the muddy middle. 

A non-fiction writer’s job is to capture and relate to the reader a taste of real life. And imagine how much of a kinship we may feel with an author who’s willing to share their own struggles. There’s nothing that tugs at a mother’s heart more than a sick child. How difficult it must be when nobody knows what’s actually ailing him. It can be a very troubling and dark place to be, especially when the medical tests continue to show inconclusive. 

While waiting for her son’s diagnosis, Lynnette relates what it’s like to live inside this murky process, detailing, “Here I sit in the muddy middle, where nothing is clear, and there are more questions than answers. Each time we think we might be moving, another roadblock appears to delay the process.” How many medical reviews and committees could a mother possibly sit through? 

At the time, Lynnette felt like her life was holding together by just a thread. As time passed, she had an epiphany of sorts, and merited to develop a new outlook, revealing, “As much as I want answers, a diagnosis, and timelines so I can wrap my mind around whatever comes next, I’m growing to appreciate the muddy middle.” Although it hadn’t been easy, Lynnette indicated that she finally learned the “value of the muddy middle.” She saw it as an opportunity to place the fate of the medical process in the hands of Hashem. It was her trust in Hashem that would keep her spirits up. With His help, she’d be able to avoid being swallowed up by the “murky depths,” and, ultimately, strengthen the thread that’s been holding her life together all along.  

I’m impressed at what we can gleam from the experience of the author’s that I have quoted above. Whatever path we’re taking in life, we’re all bound to get stuck at some point along the way. It’s not always clear how to move from point A to point B. As I'm writing this, in order to move forward, I bring to mind the many times that I’ve already succeeded at schlepping my legs out from the muddy middle. And although I have the option of walling in its mud, just like anyone who’s authoring their own story, I’m learning to embrace life and how to trust the process as I move forward. 
 
This Book Has Purpose
This book is for the person who’s interested in taking back control of their life. It contains clever ways to set aside the concerns that hold us back from moving forward. 

Walking yourself through this book will make you feel like you’re controlling the shots. And you’ll be able to set yourself free from the foreign thought and unhealthy behaviors that have been keeping who you truly are at bay.

In the following chapters, you’ll learn how to listen (and speak) to your soul, identify the bad spots, focus on your good parts, live according to your true values, and tell your story in the way that you’ve always yearned to have it told. 

And if reading this book manages to help you move a single hairsbreadth forward—one step towards becoming the best version of yourself—I’ll be able to confidently say that I’ve, thankfully, done my part. 




Unlike the little piggy’s family that eventually decided to jump in and join her in her fun, most of us just end up feeling stuck, confused and frozen in our tracks. It’s scary how easily we can lose ourselves at any point in the process. 

My mind’s foggy, and I feel like there’s a heavy weight resting on my shoulders. The perfectionist in me is slowing me down, while the head executive in me is putting on the pressure. It’s telling me to “get things done.” How do I do so when my thoughts are muddled and my heart is beating amuck? 

The first thing I’m going to do is remind myself that this uncomfortable state of affairs is only temporary. This is not the first time I’ve gotten stuck along the way. There will always be sticky times in life, and as I'm writing this, it helps to bring to mind the many times that I’ve already succeeded to schlepp myself out.

This uncomfortable space is strangely familiar to me. It’s like I’ve visited this place many times before. It muddies my mind, and I feel bogged down in it. A breath of understanding surfaced, and I noted to myself, “When you lack clarity in life, you feel stuck.” When I’m unsure of how to move forward, I tend to find myself in the same old sticky situation. Whatever one would call the location, I felt like I was smack-dab in the middle of it.

There will always be sticky times in life, and as I'm writing this, it helps to bring to mind the many times that I’ve already succeeded to schlepp myself out. We all get stuck along the way. In order to move forward, we must all learn to embrace the process.If not, we have the potential of wallowing in the mud.It's also important to note that I’m not alone in this feeling confused, down and lost thing. 

I would need someone to be a guide in order to get unstuck and keep me on track. In order to move forward, I’d require an experienced advocate. A colleague introduced me to a well renowned editor and writing coach living in LA. 

I had already started writing and reorganizing the information at this point, and had reached a fork in the road. I didn’t know what to do next. I could either continue aimlessly writing, or put together another potential outline. Knowing that I had my writing coach in my corner took off the pressure. She told me that she’d like to see an outline.

Knowing with clarity what to do next unclogged my process, and I put together with ease. I submitted a two page outline the very next day. I realized that I had already imagined it, and I needed it was just waiting to come… When stuck, it’s amazingly freeing when an expert can tell us what next step to take in our process. 

We all get stuck along the way. In order to move forward, we must all learn to embrace the process.If not, we have the potential of wallowing in the mud. 
I knew this was fitting because like many other author’s, I may describe the same experience happening at different stages of the process. It became a reoccurring theme, an irritating yet predictable pattern.

!!Stuck in the middle between who I thougt I was, who I want to be, who I was trying to be, and the person who I thought I started to be instead.!!
 
I knew it was a problem once I noticed that being stuck in the middle started to go beyond the writing. It began to affect my daily efforts, my emotional state, and my relationships started to suffer. 

When stuck in the muddy middle I began to question myself. I doubted my purpose, questioned whether I had bitten off more than I could chew. I questioned my own self-worth. 


My doubts led to negative and unhealthy behaviors. I found myself clinging to old way of thinking and behaving. 

I had opened myself to foreign thoughts. Un healthy eating habits. Forget to eat for many hours, and when I deep I’d reach for junk and .Other self-defeating behaviors.
 
The first time I stumbled into this mess was the hardest, but with each consecutive time, the quicker I was able to get back on track. Every time I returned to solid ground, the confident I became. I learned to trust the writing process. It had begun to be my life’s process, journey, …


I get stuck.

I’m pretty tangled in thought right now . Recently, this book received a big edit, and I’m thinking about writing a new introduction. I’m stuck, again, not knowing exactly what to say. I get anxious, my mind fogs, and it feels like a heavy weight rests on my shoulders when I don’t know how to express myself. It’s hard to press on when my mind is muddled and my heart beats over time. I’m stuck and I’m not exactly sure to where it is that I’m headed. 

The positive thing is that I know this is only a temporary hang-up. I’ve been stuck so many times that I’ve started to trust the writing process. The more experience I’ve had, the wiser I’ve become to these sticky times. 


I think back to the first time that I felt completely muddled. I had just left my meeting with Mosaica Press. Our discussion went well. They really seemed to enjoy my 15 minute presentation. Although they referred to their staff as a “team,” I walked out feeling like they were more like a family.

I was stoked to start writing. It was like any other beginning. I was filled with both excitement and trepidation. I was afraid to take my first step forward, but found solace in the fact that I wouldn’t be starting the project from scratch. I had given a series of lectures to a group of students a year before and had already recorded and transposed them into a living document. I was happy to be starting with a 64 page Google Doc filled with plenty of relevant information. 

As I looked out the window of the train, a thought startled me: “But now I have to write a book. And how am I supposed to turn a series of lectures into book-form?” I simply had no idea, and was immediately consumed by dread. I felt so uncomfortable. I looked around as if to find the answers somewhere on the train, but my mind went blank; the windows darkened, and I spent the remaining two hours of trip trying to figure out how to pull myself out of my newly found funk. 

I hadn’t even begun the project and I already felt as if I had lost track of myself in the process. I was at a standstill. I felt stuck.
 
I would need someone to be a guide in order to get unstuck and keep me on track. In order to move forward, I’d require an experienced advocate. A colleague introduced me to a well renowned editor and writing coach living in LA. 

I had already started writing and reorganizing the information at this point, and had reached a fork in the road. I didn’t know what to do next. I could either continue aimlessly writing, or put together another potential outline. Knowing that I had my writing coach in my corner took off the pressure. She told me that she’d like to see an outline.

Knowing with clarity what to do next unclogged my process, and I put together with ease. I submitted a two page outline the very next day. I realized that I had already imagined it, and I needed it was just waiting to come… When stuck, it’s amazingly freeing when an expert can tell us what next step to take in our process. 

We all get stuck along the way. In order to move forward, we must all learn to embrace the process.If not, we have the potential of wallowing in the mud.

I knew that I entered an uncomfortable space. It felt strangely familiar. It was as if I’d visited this place before, and I felt smack-dab in the middle of it. That’s when I said to myself, “When I lack clarity in life, I feel stuck.” When I’m unsure of how to move forward, I tend to find myself in the same old sticky situation. Whatever one would call the location, I felt like I was smack-dab in the middle of it. 

I was reminded of a children’s book that I had often read to the kids at bedtime. It’s called The Piggy in the Puddle.  The story depicts a little piggy’s parents whoupset I had frequently read it at bedtime to the kids. It’s about a little piggy who to her parents dismay, is having too much fun playing in “the muddy little puddle.”

“See her dawdle, see her diddle
In the muddy, muddy middle.”

Her parents (and brother) try everything in their power to entice her out of the muddy puddle. But she’ll having nothing of it, answering, “oofy-poofy, oofy-poofy -- NOPE!” 

I, too, was getting stuck in the muddy middle. And although intuitively at times I knew that this was a big part of the writing process, I struggled to see the joy in it. Unlike the little piggy’s family that jumped in to join her in her fun, most of us just end up feeling stuck and lost. We tend to lose ourselves in the middle of the process. 



I get stuck.

The most recent time that I felt stuck happened while writing this book. I really struggled. I stepped into muddy waters more than once. My head wasn’t clear. I began to feel anxious. I felt like I had lost my way.

I felt myself get stuck while writing this book.

I was convinced that I’d veered off-track. I struggled to find solid ground. I had fallen into what writers often call the muddy middle.

This literary term is apropos. I had become totally consumed with writing, and I had fallen into what writers often call the muddy middle.

I knew this was fitting because like many other author’s, I may describe the same experience happening at different stages of the process. It became a reoccurring theme, an irritating yet predictable pattern.

!!Stuck in the middle between who I thougt I was, who I want to be, who I was trying to be, and the person who I thought I started to be instead.!!
 
I knew it was a problem once I noticed that being stuck in the middle started to go beyond the writing. It began to affect my daily efforts, my emotional state, and my relationships started to suffer. 

When stuck in the muddy middle I began to question myself. I doubted my purpose, questioned whether I had bitten off more than I could chew. I questioned my own self-worth. 


My doubts led to negative and unhealthy behaviors. I found myself clinging to old way of thinking and behaving. 

I had opened myself to foreign thoughts. Un healthy eating habits. Forget to eat for many hours, and when I deep I’d reach for junk and .Other self-defeating behaviors.
 
The first time I stumbled into this mess was the hardest, but with each consecutive time, the quicker I was able to get back on track. Every time I returned to solid ground, the confident I became. I learned to trust the writing process. It had begun to be my life’s process, journey, …


(Article - openlettersmonthly.com/NovelReadings) Rohan Maitzen, July 20, 2017 (The Muddy, Muddy Middle: My Writing Process): “I still find the phase of writing in between the taking-notes-and-doing-pre-writing stage and the producing-a-reasonably-decent-draft stage and the producing-a-reasonably-decent-draft stage psychologically taxing.” All of the words “are all in a kind of virtual heap and I can’t yet see what order to put them in, or how to choose among them, or how to say properly (clearly, eloquently)….” “In between, there’s just so much uncertainty.”

“I’m learning to trust my own process more: I know from experience that this muddy middle is a phase of its own…” “Eventually, though, I know I will get out of the mess.” “I can almost see now, too, how the parts will fit together-almost!....today’s work did help me to believe in the process again and feel more confident that the next phase will come.”

(Article-thinkingthroughourfingers.com, Surviving the Muddy Middle, April 14, 2017, Amanda Rawson Hill): Parts of the story: “The beginning, the rising action, climax, and resolution.” You might “have a story idea, a basic premise and beginning…But…what about the middle parts?” Creating space for possible tension at the beginning of your story will give you place to go when you get to the middle and aren’t sure what happens next.” 1. Provide Several Sources of Motivation (adding all types of tension between trying to achieve things or between characters, running out of gas…), 2.Each Character Needs to Briong Something to the Tension Table (“If you’re looking up your word count and not sure where to go, lean into some of those tensions between your characters. Have something spark. Maybe it will leas you somewhere good.”), 3. Give Your Characters Secrets (All these hidden motives and secrets make for plenty of misunderstandings, wild goose chases, fighting, and drama in their own right.” Give them “something they’re trying to hide.” Muddy Middle is when: “you’re stuck and not sure how to get from point A to point B.” 

Nikkitate.wordpress.com, Nikki Tate- Author, Repost: Just Before the Muddy Middle, by WRITERGRRRL - The path to completion is never easy… (“theres’ a stage in every writing project where the first draft seems unfinishable…50-75% mark.” “By then, I’m frustrated by how slow things are going, feel like I’m never going to finish the first draft…””I’m usually feeling bogged down by all the reading I’ve done and physically m buried under stacks of…books””But just before I get to that dreadful muddy middle where it seems there is no realistic chance I will ever finish writing the first draft, there’s a lovely stage of enthusiasm and ease that last up until the first third is done.” “What I aslo know is that this feeling of ‘I’ve got this’ is about to turn into ‘What the hell was I thinking?” as I approach the halfway mark and the beginning of the muddy middle.” Starts questioning her work uptill now.

Plots imitate real life:
(kilzoneblog.com - The Muddy Middle: Where good plots go to die, January 2014, Joe Moore): Just reread Gone with the Wind. “It clocks in at 63 chapters. The first five …opening…the story essentially wraps up in one chapter. So what did Margaret Mithchel fill the 57 chapters in between with? Challenges, obstacles, reversals of fortune for characters…” “Jaws: Setbacks, Pendulum swings of emotion, Raising the stakes, Obstacles, Rift in the team, Isolation of the hero.”

Real life example:
(lynnettesheppard.com, august 22, -waiting for a diagnosos for her sick son, “Here I sit in the muddy middle, where nothing is clear, and there are more questions than answers. Each time we think we might be moving, another roadblock appears to delay the process.” She starts to learn the “value of the muddy middle,” reaches to god.
 
The purpose of this book…
This book is for the person who’s interested in taking back control of their life. I t contains clever ways to set aside the concerns that hold us back from moving forward. 

Walking yourself through this book will make you feel like you’re controlling the shots. And you’ll be able to set yourself free from the foreign thought and unhealthy behaviors that have been keeping who you truly are at bay.

In the following chapters, you’ll learn how to listen (and speak) to your soul, identify the bad spots, focus on your good parts, live according to your true values, and tell your story in the way that you’ve always yearned to have it told. 

And if reading this book manages to help you move a single hairsbreadth forward--one step towards becoming the best version of yourself--I’ll be able to confidently say that I’ve, thankfully, done my part. 
________________________________________
 
Section I: The Face of Adversity

________________________________________

— Your Antagonist —

You’re the author of your own story. You’re the main character, and as you know, a compelling story always has the major character come into conflict with an opposing force. 

This force is your Antagonist.

It wants to see you struggle. It snuggles up next to you, rubs its shoulders against you, and attempts to feed you its lines all day long. 

It wants you to follow its script, not yours.

The Antagonist tries to distort our vision. It blurs the lenses with which we view ourselves and the world around us. Our perception of reality becomes muddied by its foreign messages and external expectations. It’s easy to become misguided by its thick layers of deception.

Would you describe yourself as a wise person? 

You’ve got your struggles just like everyone else. You’re most likely wiser in some aspects of your life than others, and whether you’re fully aware of it or not, you’re always making efforts to become the person who you truly want to be. 

Have you ever met anyone who isn’t grappling with something? We’re all struggling with one thing or another. Every one of us has an Antagonist.

Your Antagonist leaves you good reason to be concerned. It’s doing everything in its power to distract and entice you into doing the wrong thing. When you start to identify yourself with the negative messages that it delivers, you’re bound to start experiencing a heightened degree of discomfort, emptiness, pain and tension.

It’s a Bother
You’ve probably already given what’s bothering you a name. People often call it anxiety, depression, mania, fear or addiction. A good diagnostician is able to break down one’s negative behaviors and thought patterns into simple terms.

You can learn a lot from these labels. 

The problem is when we start defining ourselves by them. It’s not always clear from where they originated. One thing’s for certain, once we start basing our most important life decisions on our Antagonist’s ill-driven directives, that’s when we know that we’ve stumbled right into the muddy middle. 

Imagine making life decisions based on your own values, making choices that look right and feel good, and whenever you decide to take your next step, you can count on it to be firmly planted and well secured. 

What if you could establish a mutual understanding with your Antagonist, and change the relationship for the better? Nothing could stop you from writing your own story in your own way. 

You’d have the freedom to develop a narrative that suits you best. 

In order to start relating to our Antagonist on our own terms, we have to become wiser to its daily shenanigans. As long as we’re convinced of its rhetoric, it’ll continue to rule over us. 

It’ll continue to dictate your life. 

It takes a wise person to be able to avoid one’s Antagonist’s whims, but when we time and time again find ourselves stuck in the muddy middle, it’s upon us to start developing new and clever ways to finagle ourselves out from the middle of its sticky mud.

>> Takeaways <<
Your Antagonist is an opposing force. It distorts your vision, blurring the lenses of how you view yourself and the world around you. 
Basing our life’s decisions on the labels (i.e, anxious, depressed, addicted) that we place upon ourselves, propels us right into the muddy middle.
It’s wise to understand your Antagonist’s ways, or it will continue to rule over you.
When you’re living according to your own values, you’re free to walk your own path.

________________________________________

 
Section II: Clever or Wise
________________________________________

The Dean of Students approached the podium at the front of the study hall. He moved his eyes around the room, and asked the students, “Do you know the difference between the Clever Person and the Wise Person?” 

The room was silent. 

It was obviously a rhetorical question. He quickly clarified by stating, “The Clever Person is cunning enough to get out of any sticky situation in which they find themselves. The Wise Person is smart enough to have not gotten themselves stuck into the situation in the first place.”

These concepts are well elucidated in one of the early compilations of Jewish Law. 

The first volume of the Arba'ah Turim (Tur) discusses the laws for daily practice. It focuses on what we do as we roll out of bed in the morning, highlights the activities that we perform throughout the day, and concludes with what we do as we crawl back into bed at night. 

How would you introduce this body of daily law and practice?

Surprisingly, the volume begins with a mishnah from Pirkei Avos (Ethics of Our Fathers). The main concern of Pirkei Avos is to teach us about the lofty character and deep wisdom inherent in the Jewish sages, and even more significantly, to demonstrate for us how to learn to live by their example. 

Why does the Tur begin with an “ethical tract”?
Knowing that we normally don’t enact laws from a mishnah, we may assume that it’s coming to serve a different purpose.  Since it was placed at the beginning, we may deduce that developing and refining ourselves is a prerequisite to learning the laws concerning our daily practice. 















Yehuda Ben Teima implores us all to be: 
“Strong as a leopard, 
light as an eagle, 
swift as a deer, 
and mighty as a lion 
to do the will of your Father in Heaven.” (Pirkei Avos 5:20) 












— The Wise Person —

Yehuda Ben Teima
The Eagle
The Tur clarifies Yehuda Ben Teima’s teaching. He explains that being light as an eagle is equated to seeing with our eyes. The eagle floats in the air. It soars among the clouds, and gazes at everything below from a bird’s-eye-view.

The eagle’s vision is keen from above, allowing it to be critical of what lies ahead. Like the eagle, a wise person sees everything, and knows when to avert their eyes to avoid focusing on the things that might affect them negatively. 

Gazing upon that which isn't in our best interests runs us the risk of being captured in its grasp, falling away from our path, and losing sight of ourselves. 

We miss the mark, fall off-step, trip and quickly stumble into the quagmire. It’s a simple theorem: your eyes see, your heart desires, and you finish the deed. It only takes a split second to find yourself sliding down the wrong path. 

A bird’s-eye-view lends us the ability to shift our sights, change our focus, and point ourselves in the right direction. The eagle-eye is very acute. It has the uncanny ability to change its view from an entire valley to a scope of ten square inches - from 1,000 yards away. 

We, too, can zero in on what suits us best. 

Soaring above allows you to perceive the greater picture. Having a bird’s-eye-view offers proper perspective. It allows us to recognize the dangerous parts, stay on top of things, and maintain trajectory as we continue to walk along our path. 

Our eyes are highly impressionable. In order to not be thrown off kilter, a wise person shields their eyes against negative external influences. But when left to their own devices, foreign messages and expectations can slip through one’s lenses. 

They cloud the windows to your soul. 

The real issue arises when we begin defining ourselves by their rhetoric. Listening to our Antagonist’s unhealthy notions leads us to doubt and feel distant from ourselves. 

These messages become so ingrained in us that the voice which echoes in our mind even starts to sound like our very own. 

Some of its narratives we’ve adopted more recently, but others we’ve been carrying around since childhood. We’ve all heard messages like: 
“Why can’t you learn as well as Benny?” 
	“You’re the most talented in your class.” 
	“Why are you so lazy?” 
	“You’re the smartest in your grade.” 
	“How come you never smile.” 
	“Your sister is the creative one in the family.” 
	“You’re not good enough to play.” 
	“Eat! You need to put some meat on those bones.”
	“You’re the pretty one in the family.”
	“Stop with the pastries. It’s not like you have Sarah’s figure.” 

Although our parents, teachers, and other authority figures (and friends) might have meant well, some of the stories and labels that they’ve projected upon us are far from empowering. Some old messages were shared with the greatest of intentions, but were perceived as highly negative.

If you’re viewing yourself through external eyes, you’re most likely basing your life’s choices from the outside-in. 

A wise person doesn’t offer an open invitation to negative outside influences. When left unprotected, we place our most intimate, sacred space into their grubby hands. 

Knowing how impressionable we can be, Yehuda Ben Teima demands that we take action, and close our eyes to the negative ideas and foreign expectations that we encounter every day. 

This way we can keep our sights inward, and focus forward on the person who we truly want to be. 

The eagle-eye is discerning and lends us a clear perspective. This is how a wise person chooses to walk through life. The approach is a proactive one, and is exactly what we need to successfully interact with your world from the inside-out.

The Lion 
The Tur indicates that Yehuda Ben Teima’s mishna is coming to teach that our heart coincides with the attributes of a lion.  

It’s imploring us to be mighty as a lion as we do our life’s work. In other words, in order to stick close to our path, we need to be courageous. That requires a firmness of purpose.

Living according to your own story is a job fit only for the lionhearted. 

It’s within the chambers of our heart that we find the courage to make proper, healthy, and educated life decisions. Our heart is home to inspiration, and the space in which we can freely choose to walk down either a good path or a bad one. 

In challenging times, the wisdom in our heart encourages us to take pause and reflect, reorient and redirect. In the face of our Antagonist’s alternative plans, it’s always wise to have our best interests at heart. 

A lion is inwardly mighty. It outwardly inspires. It’s a wise leader. It’s the King of the Jungle! It’s proactive, intuitively working from the inside-out. The lionheart doesn’t need to draw attention to itself through externalities. It already knows who it is. It knows its purpose.

Yehuda Ben Teima believes that you can strengthen and protect yourself, and avoid letting every little thing in life throw you off course. 

The sages teach us that the symbol of Yehuda is the lion. Jews are called Yehudim, which is an empowering label that reminds us that we’re intrinsically mighty. We’ve all been designated to be leaders, just as the young Yehuda was appointed by Yaakov. He blessed him, saying, "You are a lion's cub" (Gen. 49:9). 

A simple swapping of the letters in the word aryeh (lion), transforms the letters into the word, yira. A Jew’s awe of Hashem lives deep within their heart. It’s an internal, intimate and ongoing relationship. 

Allowing foreign messages and external expectations to slip through our eyes ignites an insatiable desire. Once our heart is swayed in their direction, it’s already too late. 

Your legs sprint to the finish. 

But Yehuda Ben Teima has great faith in us. He believes that even if we falter with our eyes, we still have the power to take charge. 

He’s confident that you own the insight to take pause, and to question any rush of desire. As a wise person, we have the means to stop the negative flow by guiding ourselves from deep within our heart. 

We’re able to catch ourselves en route, and personally inquire, “Is this yearning really a good thing for me? Is pursuing this feeling really in my best interests?” 

Our eyes will always be bombarded by unhealthy external influences, but with plenty of experience, in unclear and muddy times, we’re able to gather enough strength in our heart to direct our eyes away from any sight of trouble. 

Our hearts true desire will call out to them, roaring, “Protect yourselves! Ignore the bad messages and misleading images that continue to pop up before you.” 

But you’re still going to make mistakes. And there’s also purpose to that. 
Over time, we become more wise to their demeanor, and see them for what they truly are. 

When we put our full heart into life, along with a been-there-done-that attitude, we can always return to the drawing board and redraft our personal narrative for the better. Then we may confidently adjust our sights and start walking in a more favored direction. 

The Deer 
Our legs are likened to the quickness of a deer. They’re built for speed, and their ultimate purpose is to help us run to do goodness. Legs mean action, and they’re the very tool which may lead us out of life’s many hazardous situations. 

The Tur cautions about how easy it is to fall prey to the negative influences which often seep into our heart. If we’re not careful with our eyes at the start, our legs will surely run to the finish. 

It’s like driving in a nail. It leaves us with a sense of permanence. We wind up feeling stuck, disconnected, disoriented and distant from the person who we truly want to be. 

Although we couldn’t be any closer to who we actually are, the illusion is quite convincing, and unfortunately, many people end up wallowing in their mistakes. Feelings of doubt, blame, and ineptitude are demoralizing. 

How do you find your way out? 

When we grow tired of feeling stuck, we can always get inspired by moving our legs. 

When we’re at risk of losing ourselves in the muddy middle, it’s a propitious time to get moving like a deer. When encountering a predator, they instinctively run off. 

We can leave the scene, both physically and figuratively. Once our legs are moving, our heart ignites, directing us to solid ground. 

Once we start feeling more secure, we can then reset our sights on what we really care about. Focusing on what we truly value is always an invitation to approach life from the inside-out. 

When we find ourselves feeling down, anxious, or caught like a deer in the headlights, our legs are going to be our best resource. 

A change of scenery usually does the trick. It may be just enough to take in a deep breath, and imagine ourselves breathing in a more secure place. Once we’re able to picture ourselves in a new light, and see ourselves from a new angle, it’s much easier to refresh our view on life.

According to the Tur, Yehuda Ben Teima is revealing that our legs are built for doing acts of kindness both for ourselves and others. Each step that you take towards goodness creates another channel for good. Putting your legs into motion invites more goodness into your life and into the lives of others.

Removing yourself from the muddy middle is in itself an act of kindness. 

The Leopard 
Being bold as a leopard is known to be synonymous with extreme brazenness and stubbornness. Although Yehuda Ben Teima strategically lists this trait at the beginning of his Mishnah, I’ve chosen to reveal it last in order to stress its considerable importance. According to the Tur, this fundamental attribute takes precedence over all the others. 

In order for a wise person to develop a critical eye of what lies before them, they must first be shameless in the face of negative outside forces. 

It’s alarming that Yehuda Ben Teima would even present this trait in his mishnah. The sages teach us that being brazen, or azut panim (lit. a boldness of face), should be avoided at any cost. 

Boldness, azut, is considered a highly unfavorable personality trait. It’s characterized by hardness, shamelessness, and a lack of restraint or regard for another’s feelings. Rabbi Yehuda HaNassi was even known to begin his personal morning prayers by beseeching, “May it be your will, HaShem my G-d, and G-d of my forefathers, that you rescue me today from brazen people [azai panim] and from [my own] brazenness [azut]” (Brachos 16b).

All the more surprising, Yehuda Ben Teima seems to contradict himself by continuing his very mishnah with the following: “The brazen person heads to the purgatory of gehinnom [az panim], whereas one who is shamefaced [bosh panim] will enjoy Gan Eden” (Avos 5:20). 
Is brazenness good or bad?
There’s a season for everything. Every attribute can be used either for the good or for the bad. In the beginning of his mishnah, Yehuda Ben Teima is emphasizing that there’s a positive side to being brazen, and you’re wise to implement it when deemed necessary.
“Who is like the wise person, and who knows the meaning of a thing? A person's wisdom makes their face shine, and the boldness of their face is transformed” (Kohelet 8:1).
A wise person has a strong constitution and holds a positive self-regard. Being bold as a leopard may be mistakenly viewed as arrogance, but being “hard” and unbending sometimes has its place: When you encounter negative outside influences it doesn’t pay to be bashful. It’s essential to be bold in the face of doubt, and to deflect alien messages and outside expectations.

The Tur indicates that there’ll be times in our life when we’ll be presented with the right thing to do. And when we’ll want to do this right thing, there’ll be an upsurge of energy, a negative force that will pop up and try to distract us from accomplishing our goal. 

On the surface, the Tur blames this force on the people with whom we encounter in our daily life, but it truly digs deeper. Our Antagonist has actually become clever enough to speak to us in our own language. It’s mastered our tone of voice, and our every intonation. 

Its grandiloquence tries to throw us off track, and make it nearly impossible for us to do the right thing. 

We require a good pair of blinders to keep all of its noise out. 

The leopard is a solitary and territorial animal. They’re not even intimidated by animals that outweigh them. You, too, can choose not to be intimidated by such opposing forces. 

Yehuda Ben Teima believes that we can be unabashed in the face of adversity.

Are we living up to the expectations of Yehuda Ben Teima? Are we thinking and acting wisely? 

It takes a wise person to avoid getting stuck in our Antagonist’s muddy meddlings.

>> Takeaways <<
Yehuda Ben Teima emplores us to be: “Strong as a leopard, light as an eagle, swift as a deer, and mighty as a lion to do the will of your Father in Heaven.”

(The Eagle)
	Seeing things from above from a bird’s-eye-view allows you to avoid negativity, lends you perspective, and helps you to maintain trajectory along your path.
	Looking at the wrong thing causes you to lose sight of yourself, but an eagle-eye allows you to zero in on what suits you best.
(The Lion)
	Your heart is home to inspiration, and is where you choose to walk down either a good path or a bad one.
	Making mistakes makes you wiser to the ways of your desires, lending you the wherewithal to catch yourself en route, question any rush of desire, and to take charge.
(The Deer)
	Legs mean action and they are built to do goodness, inviting goodness into your life and into the lives of others.
	Once stuck in a sticky situation, it’s your legs that get you moving, leaving the negative influences behind. 
(The Leopard)
	A wise person has a strong constitution and holds a positive self-regard. 
	A leopard is solitary and wears blinders, and in order to avoid stumbling into the muddy middle, you must be unabashed in the face of negative outside forces.

________________________________________

 
— The Clever Person —

King David
A little over a thousand years before Yehuda Ben Teima’s mishnah came into circulation, King David was also inclined to focus on his eyes, heart and legs. But as the Tur points out, in order to tell his own story, he twisted things around: 

	King David would first focus on his legs and beseech Hashem, “Lead me on the path of Your statutes [Your ways], for that is my desire” (Psalm 119:35) 
	He then would entreat, “Turn my heart toward Your testimonies [Your Torah] and not to greed” (Psalm 119:36)
	Lastly, he would request, “Avert my eyes from seeing falsehood; through Your ways sustain me” (Psalm 119:37) 

The role of a wise person has been wonderfully elucidated by Yehuda Ben Teima. What does the King of Israel achieve by reversing the order of things? 

By first focusing on the legs, King David is able to illuminate the path of a clever person. In other words, if you weren't wise enough to avoid the uncomfortable situation into which you’ve stumbled, you’re going to require a very tactical and quick getaway. 

King David’s personal journey testifies to how we may strategically overcome life’s most sticky situations. He draws from his own life experiences to adeptly guide us through the many pitfalls that we’re bound to encounter along our way. 

He believes that you, too, can soar to the great heights of Yehuda Ben Teima, but for King David, the path toward becoming a wise person is a clever one. 

Remember how impressionable our eyes can be? 

According to the Tur, we can’t afford to rely on the notion that only good things will be delivered before our eyes. We need to take special care to protect our eyes from the common trappings; the eye-candy that we’re often bombarded with in the media and in the streets. 

How many times has this scenario happened to you? You’re walking down the sidewalk minding your own business, and you turn the corner, and blamo! A terribly eye-catching, mesmerizing and not-so-healthy-for-you thing is staring you right in the face. 

You’re already looking in its direction. 

It’s simply unavoidable. 

Life is full of surprises, and it takes a lot of technical know-how to be able to redirect our eyes in a moment’s notice. We’re all destined to fall under the spell of our gaze, so before you embark on your journey, like King David, you must first pray for no surprise attacks along the way. 

There’s enough to grapple with in life to also have to worry about what might be waiting to pounce on us from around the corner. 

King David had a lot of experience finding himself in difficult situations. His eyes would often become entangled in the honeytrap, and his legs would quickly tumble into the sticky muck. 

His psalms speak volumes to his personal struggles. His poetic words affirm the many intimate trials and tribulations that he was able to overcome in his life. Through his personal narrative, he masterfully imparts his clever method to free oneself of unhealthy desires, negative external influences and self-evading pursuits. 

Just like King David, when caught in the middle of your predicament, you may not even remember how you arrived. Life is very blurry in the muddy, muddy middle. 

Your Only Recourse
What’s your recourse? 

Maybe thinking deeply about one’s actions would work. But if you’re of sound mind, would you have let yourself be manipulated into your current state in the first place? Can you really regain control of your thoughts right now?

Your heart chose its desired path. It flowed with excitement, and now you’re standing muddled knee deep in the muddy middle. 

Your best option is to encourage your legs to start moving. The sages teach us that a change of space changes our mazel, our fate.  That may require a move to a new city, refurbishing or repositioning our home furniture, or at least finding ourselves a new place to hang out. 

Switching careers or starting a new hobby often works. 

Does that sound like too much? 

The external change does not have to be huge. It’s a shift in perspective that’s really your aim. Most of the time, going for a walk manages to clear and reorient our thoughts. It’s also good to reach out to a person who we know will have our best interests in mind. It’s helpful to speak to someone who can reflect back to us our current orientation, and introduce to us a refreshing and brand new point of view. 

And as any good friend would do, they’ll tell you that everyone stumbles into the muddy middle, but with every flop you can become all the more clever. It just takes practice. 

And that the key to becoming more cunning is to first be in touch with your whereabouts. 

Imagine how that process would begin. We might say, “Oh no, here I am again. I don’t know how I got here. I don’t remember asking for this. I don’t recall stepping into this mess.  But now I’m feeling stuck, anxious and down in the dumps.” 

It stinks to be left feeling confused, troubled and downhearted. Whether or not we’ve walked down this negative path before, we can at least know our current location. This self-awareness is what allows us to take pause to reflect, and redirect.

Once we’ve taken a breath and determined our bearings, we can always re-calibrate and firmly put our best foot forward. Stepping out of our negative circumstances takes practice, but the more clever we get the easier it becomes.

The Antagonist wants us to feel out of sorts. When we start to feel lost, confused and disconnected, it’s a clear indicater that we’ve lost track of our whereabouts. When this occurs, it’s essential to restablish our present location. A clever way to do so is by imagining the most recent time in which we last stepped into the muddy middle. 

You can even close your eyes and picture yourself there. Maybe you were alone. If not, think about who was there with you. Do you remember the scene? This is how to locate your current whereabouts. It’s a lot like being frozen in time. You’re still there. The memory is alive for you now. It’s as if you’re still living it in the present moment. 

If we don’t seek this awareness it’ll become our mess, we’ll own it, and we’ll be bound to relive our struggle over and over again.

So you’re seized by anxiety, feeling melancholic or you’re lacking impulse control. However captivating it may be, our job in life is way too important to remain gripped by our Antagonist’s influence. Do anything in your power to remove yourself from the situation. 

Get your legs moving again. 

Once our legs are activated, and I mean both literally and figuratively, our blood starts to pump and our heart awakens. With a beating heart, our Antagonist becomes more transparent, and we begin to grow more wise to its antics. Our eyes see clearly, and we perceive it for what it truly is. 

Knowing the true nature of our Antagonist makes us less inclined to repeat its prescription. That’s the key to begin developing a leopardlike attitude, and to start saying with confidence, “I’m sick of you. I know your muddy path is not good for me. I refuse to be led down that dirty road ever again.”

King David knows what it means to stumble. His life gives testimony to the clever method in which he removes himself from both external and internal troubles. The more times that he manages to cleverly emerge from his predicament, the wiser he becomes. 

But does he sound like he’s sporting wings? Is he soaring in the air, scoping things out below from a bird’s-eye-view? 

He’s in the midst. He’s always caught in the muddy middle. He’s in it, every time! Do you know anybody like that? Has anyone ever told you, “I’m stuck. Oh my goodness. How did I get here? I know I’ve been here before, and I keep reliving the same old stuff over and over again. I can’t get out of this vicious cycle. This is awful. I’m distressed; I’m depressed, I’m anxious. I hate being here. I need therapy.” 

If so, it’s time for them to speak to a spiritual doctor! 

If you know anyone suffering like this, you can remind them that the King of Israel has also walked many miles in their sandals. He, too, has been caught in the muddy middle. Let them know that they don’t have a monopoly on this being stuck, lost and confused thing. 

Tell them, “You are amongst royalty!” 

>> Takeaways <<
King David...
	To become wise you must first be clever. 
	King David’s life gives testimony to his clever method of freeing yourself of unhealthy desires, negative external influences and self-evading pursuits. 
	When your thinking is corrupted, your only recourse is to get your legs moving: change your place, change your perspective.
	Feel lost? Imagine the last place you stumbled. You’re still there. 


________________________________________

 
Section III: The Shmutz
________________________________________

— The Eagle-Eye —

Corrective Lenses 
Our eyes are like cameras. When you snap an image of the visual world it’s pictured in the optics of your eye. How the light hits your eyes has much to do with how you perceive the world.

Our Antagonist plays with this perception. It plays with our mind. It fogs the lenses with which we view the world. What we take in has much to do with the way light travels. 

Light waves are broadcast by way of a transmission medium, or within an emptiness or vacuum. A transmission medium is a material substance that redirects incoming light, i.e, a film, a paste, a mask or a screen. 

Refraction is the change in direction of the way the waves travel. When a lens is caked with too much material, or if a transmission medium is absent (like a vacuum), our perception of ourselves and the world around us becomes corrupted. 

When do you think these errors in refraction began?
 
Before you were born into this world your soul was basking in pure joy and spirituality. It was wondrous & whole. There was no excuse to doubt yourself, to be anxious or to feel down. It was a place of comfort and completeness. 

You were filled with pure authentic joy. There was nothing to be concerned or worried about.

Subsequently, you were born into the world, you lost sight of what perfection and wholeness look like. 

It’s gone, lost. It disappeared right from underneath your nose, and now you’re left with a lifetime of soul searching. Welcome to a life of travail! And painstakingly trying to retrieve that which was taken from you.

Does this sound bleak? 

This happens to be many people’s perception of what life has in store for them, but in truth, this story has been skewed. 

I also heard this narrative, and spent many years trying to spend every waking hour of the day searching for what it was that I had lost. 

In addition, I was advised that the solution to this personal problem is to search deeply, and to fastidiously turn over the concepts embedded in Hashem’s Torah until I’ve successfully inculcated their instructions into my life. 

I suppose that’s how we’re expected to imbue ourselves with the wondrousness that His Torah has to offer. According to this approach, repeatedly going over these lofty lessons is the way Hashem’s Torah becomes a part of who we are, and the manner in which it influences our field of perception.

If that narrative helps you to become the best version of yourself, great!

If you haven’t guessed already, I’ve always been troubled by the way this story was told. How is it possible that this deep connection with Hashem and His Torah, this most precious and wondrous gift, could have been forgotten? 

It’s apparent from the first Midrash in Breishis Rabba that we’re cut and parcel from Hashem’s very first thought—His Torah. Our very fabric is designed from its oneness, its wondrousness and its completeness. 

We were formed by perfection itself. So, if both your spiritual and organic makeup were fashioned from the very same ethereal material that went into creating Hashem’s Torah, how could it have been left behind at birth? 

And what kind of birthday present would that really be?

What if I told you that all of the wondrousness that we experienced wasn’t really lost, and that all the authentic joy, and everything we consider most dear to us hasn’t truly vanished?

You’d probably want to hear the real story. 

Here it is: Before we were delivered into the world, we were basking in a realm of splendor, wholeness and completion. We then received a potch on the lip, and subsequently opened our eyes to a brand new world. 

But we didn’t actually forget our experience. It just got covered up. There’s stuff in the way, and it’s been hidden from view. As a result of this refraction, our memory and perception of what it means to be whole has become muddied. 
It’s been so clouded that you’ve probably started to believe that it’s not even there. 

It’s so concealed that the people who we trust the most have even told us that it’s gone missing, and now it’s our job to go find it—to retrieve it from wherever it may be hiding.

The Shmutz
Have you ever looked around the house for your glasses only to find them already fixed to your face? 

It’s a common phenomenon where a person has misplaced something, searched everywhere imaginable, and then is shocked to realize that the whole time what they were searching for was just sitting right in front of them. 

Your glasses are already fixed to your face. Do you happen to know from where you acquired these particular set of lenses? It’s the lenses that we sport that directly affect how we define ourselves and engage the world around us. 

The degree to which you’re able to achieve your objectives in life comes down to the style of lenses that you’re wearing. It also matters in what direction you’re looking. If you’ve been hyper-focused on externalities, your view of the world has most likely become compromised. 

It’s time to take a look within. 

When we hesitate, this outside shmutz continues to corrupt our perception. And we’re the one’s who add to it. Every wrong deed, every deficient act, and every wasted moment leads to an ingathering of the muck. We add layer after layer, concealing who we truly are. One would need to be totally insane to add any more to their own bed of shmutz. 

Aren’t our souls covered up enough already? 

It’s Totally Crazy
If you think this sounds crazy, you’re not alone.

As the Talmud purports, “Ein odom choteh ela im nichnas bo ruach shtus.” Literally meaning, a person won’t do anything wrong unless a crazy breeze enters [their mind]. 

A crazy person’s mind is distracted. They lack awareness. It’s this feeling of lack which compels them to do wrong. This wrongdoing places another layer of shmutz over their eyes. It’s impossible to see the world clearly while looking at the world through muddy lenses.

Deficiency is the root of all wrongdoing. It’s been in the world since the beginning of creation. The Maharal terms this lacking as he’edar, an absence or vacuum.  When we feel that there's something missing it leads to a deep hunger and desire. And if we don’t know how to properly guide it, we’re more likely to fix our eyes upon the wrong thing, and quickly stumble in the wrong direction.

When our vision has been overtaken by a sticky void, our perception becomes significantly altered, and we’re bound to consume the very first intriguing thing that crosses before our eyes.

Once we fixate on it, it’s too late, as Hashem warns: “You’ll go insane from the vision before your eyes that you see” (Devarim 28:34). 

We’re not able to let go of the image that we see. It takes over our very being. We become convinced that it’s something that we severely lack, and we tell ourselves that we can’t live without it. Being so crazy about it, how could we not devour it?

Although we feast our eyes upon it, we hardly feel satiated by it. We may have a hunger for it, but because it’s not fitting for us, it can barely pass through the gullet. 

Like young eagles we suffer from a refraction error of the eye. It’s difficult for them to locate fish underneath the water’s surface, so they offset this deficiency by focusing on the dead fish that float above. 

And they still make mistakes, attacking other things like bobbing seaweed and plastic bottles.

We, too, stare into the middle of murky waters, and have learned to compensate by grabbing at unhealthy externals. 

When we’ve come to abandon our own sense of duty, and have become satisfied with such surface level pursuits, that’s when we know we’ve been hooked and sinkered by our Antagonist’s filthy line.

But as we mature, and become more clever about how to remove the murky film that adulterates our perception, our lenses will rectify. We’ll start to feel more whole again, and merit to spot the more healthy fish swimming beneath the water’s surface.

Crippling Quagmire 
“Save me from the mire so I don’t sink, that I’ll be rescued from my enemies and the deep waters. Don’t let the swift current sweep me away, nor the shadowy depths swallow me, and don’t let the pit close its mouth over me.”   

Does it sometimes seem like the earth is swallowing you up? If so, you’re most likely feeling down, anxious or lost. This happens to most of us. It’s no great party when you repeatedly find yourself stuck in the quagmire. 

The first dirge that we resound on the sad day of Tisha B’Av refers to the habit of toppling into a crippling quicksand [b’yevanit nechuya] that pulls us downward and offers no escape.  

When we feel down and stuck in life, we’re not actually motionless. On the contrary, the quicksand’s job is to pull us down in further.

Kind David has chronicled the times that he, too, found himself stuck in this think mud.  He was in a mess of trouble. And as we know, there’s simply nothing more uncomfortable than being caught and dragged down by our own set of troubles. 

Our Antagonist cunningly scoops up this nasty mud and shmears it all over our eyes to create a chatzitzah, working as a partition or barrier between you and the world around you. 

It creates a smokescreen which clouds the view of our path, making it all the more possible to trick us into following another. 

Sliding down the wrong path is exile personified. It’s like we’ve fallen into a pit and the mouth has closed over us. When the person who we truly want to be gets crusted over by this yavein; thick and gooey muck, it’s easy to lose our bearings. And not so coincidentally, the word yavein sounds very much like the word yeevein which means to Hellenize. Yavan is the Hebrew word for Greece, and as you know, we have ample midrashim to tell us that they’re the masters of darkness and concealment.

You’re not the only one who’s been Hellenized at one point or another.

It’s easy to stumble when the view of the path before us has become obscured and muddled. When King David would find himself in this dark and muddy place, he would look to Hashem to drag him out. After exiting the unhealthy murky pit, he would sing a brand new song, chanting, “He raised one from a [dark] pit of turbulent waters, out of the filthy, muddy mire.”  

The Metzudas Zion describes King David’s turbulent waters as the darkest of pits, and characterizes his filthy, muddy mire as the gloomiest of all shadowy depths. 

When we’re not being the best person who we can be, it’s not unusual to feel off balance. We’re quick to stumble and fall, and once we’ve tumbled into the quagmire, it’s much harder to regain our footing. When King David would find himself in this uncomfortable predicament, he would cry, “I’m sunk in the deep mire and there’s no foothold.”  

It’s difficult to maintain independence while being whisked away by negative external forces. It’s easy to lose touch with what’s important—to slip and get carried away, like King David bemoans, “I have entered the deepest waters, a rushing current sweeps me away.”   

Being stuck in the quagmire isn’t just like drowning for King David; to add to things, swift tempestuous currents would also oppose him. They would knock him off balance and sweep him away. Any attempt to battle them went awry. His energies would just bounce right back at him. The harder he pushed against them, the harder they pushed back. According to this, when caught in the muddy middle, it’s simply not worth putting up a fight.

The term for a rushing current in Hebrew is shebolet. It has the same root as shveel: an off-the-beaten path which sweeps you away from your very own.

When King David felt lost and could no longer find solid ground on his own, Hashem would quickly come to his aid, as he describes: “He set my feet upon a rock, he stabilized my steps.”  Only with Hashem’s help was King David able to regain his balance and stand again upon his own two feet. 

The bottom line is that King David had slipped (again) into the muck. He was immobile. He was treading muddy water—his legs were spinning. He was sinking to even greater depths. 

Hashem had to step in. 

The Sforno doesn’t think it’s prudent to assume that King David was of sound mind when he turned, stumbled and tumbled into the darkness. Troubleshooting, he said, “He must have been struck with some kind of sickness or disease.”

Does that mean that King David was also known to lose his mind?

It takes a crazy person to get themselves in so far over their head. But when King David was up to his own neck in troubles, an aspect of him always knew to cry out for help, calling, “Save me, Hashem, for the waters have risen up until my soul” (Psalm 69:2).

The Sforno indicates that this precarious situation signifies the Babylonian exile (or alternatively, it represents all of the exiles). A physical exile is one thing, but in order to extricate yourself from a spiritual one, you’ve got to be even more cunning.

Time and time again, Hashem helped him to regain a strong foothold, as King David reminds us: “Who forgives all your wrongdoings, Who heals all your diseases?”  Only with Hashem’s aid was he able to return to a clean bill of health.

Maybe you’ve felt like King David at one time or another. Being in the clutches of our Antagonist doesn’t give it the satisfaction that it desires. We just makes it more hungry. It drags us down, tosses us around, and tries to get us feeling as far away as possible from ourselves. It does everything in its power to stop you from actualizing your greatest potentials.

It’s bound to happen, so next time you find yourself in a muddy muddled moment, you can take King David’s lead, and give a holler to Hashem. 

If not, you won’t just feel stuck in the middle of the murky mire. As we said earlier, nobody is really immobile. There’s no such thing as stagnation. We’re either moving forwards or backwards. We’re either in or out, moving up or down. It’s an easy place to get whisked away. And as we’ve been told, the end of this slippery slope is just a muddy mess of troubles.

World Corruption 
A little mud in your eyes can’t hurt, right?

“And the wrongdoers are like the tempestuous sea, for it can’t rest, and its waters fling mud and dirt” (Isaiah, 57:20).

Misdeeds and wrongdoings toss us around. They throw us for a loop, and sling mud back into our eyes. Our physical desires strain them, and that’s downright uncomfortable. 

One thing we learn from King David is to never ask to be tested.

David’s eyes were tested. He was confronted with a sight which sealed his destiny. It consumed him, tossing him from the highest spiritual heights to the lowest of the physical lows. You’ve heard his story: In the darkest of nights, David rose from his bed. He restlessly strolled the palace roof until his eyes were seized by a sight still being told. Like a deer in the headlights, he stood frozen, seeing the most beautiful bathing woman. 

She must have been so easy on the eyes to have so easily caught his eye. 

Like an apple which tastes soft and mealy at its center, yet appears so pristine on the surface, physical beauty in this world usually only runs skin deep. 

It’s not always clear what’s good for us. 

Before we recognize its bitter taste, our eyes are already caught feasting upon it. Our eyes are fixed on it and it becomes our pursuit. 

It’s easy to get dirty in the middle of all of the excitement. 

A Bad Eye 
It’s not our Antagonist, alone, who may place our soul under arrest. Not judging ourselves and others favorably will also do the trick.

Just as a bad apple gets rejected from a basket, a bad eye propels us into exile. When banished, we’re bound to feel all alone—lost easily in a crowd. It’s as if, we’ve been plucked and sent out of the world, as Rabbi Yehoshua remarks, “A bad eye, the Antagonist, and the hatred of others remove a person from the world.”   

The Rabbeinu Yonah understands a bad eye to be jealousy. Jealousy doesn't just mean being filled with envy when gazing upon someone else’s stuff, but worse, we also hold the person in contempt. 

Meaning, if we don’t own it, then we don’t believe our friend should have it either. Jealousy rears its ugly head by denying our neighbors their possessions or qualities, and by begrudging their good fortune and accomplishments. A jealous person imprisons themselves. They’re bound to something foreign, striving to walk someone else’s path and not their own. 

Spending all our precious time on trying to have what someone else has and be someone who we’re not, locks our unique gifts and talents away. Our creative energy isn’t able to flourish. If we keep them in hiding for too long they may even wither and decay. 

What takes you out of the world? Kicking to the curb the joyous gifts that Hashem has granted you. 

The Rabbeinu Yonah indicates that a person who looks at the world with a bad eye and a crooked lens, is not happy with their lot. 

Trying to keep up with the Burnstein's doesn’t bode well. Gazing at the material wealth of our friends, and wondering when we’ll become as filthy rich as they are, brings suffering our way. 

And also onto our friends. We simply don’t live in a bubble. When we suffer, everyone around us feels it too. And if they’re not wise to it, they may even unknowingly experience our pain as if it were their very own.

Note: The sages indicate that because jealousy is a part of human nature, we have a duty to mute it. 

In all honesty, desiring that which isn’t ours is moot (even if we have the wherewithal to earn it). However hard we try, the burden of jealousy is too heavy to bear. Our body weakens, our energy tempers, and we’re taken out of the world. 

According to the Rambam, jealousy blinds us with a heavy darkness. Without light, over time, our eyes will atrophy. They become hard and leathered, and everything we gaze upon begins to appear putrid or disgusting.  

And this, he says, leads to a hatred of others.

It’s on us. It’s our own behavior that transports us out of the world. We make our bed, so it’s us who must lie in it.

It’s not a setup. Hashem isn’t punishing us. We’re miserable due to our own negative actions. And we’re not just left feeling bankrupt, but worse, our Antagonist also conceals all the goodness in life that we’d normally be allotted. 

As the Talmud states, “Anyone who sets their eyes on something which is not [meant] for them, what they seek is not given to them, and what is theirs is taken from them.”  

It’s a catch 22. Not only don’t we get what’s not meant for us, but by our own design, we’re also denied that which should be coming our way.

“They sought out many calculations [intrigues]” (Kohelet 7:29). 

David’s son is pointing out that the beginning of humanity’s frailty stems from a lack of appreciation of their own portion. When we seek to possess that which is outside of our own domain, we’re stuck viewing our world from the outside-in. 

This is humanity's downfall. When we gaze upon another’s honor or possessions, our heart fills with desire, and our conscious mind becomes tormented by inconsistent and conflicting calculations. 

Blind Spots
“For a person sees only what appears before their eyes” (Samuel I 16:7).

Do you have floaters in your eyes? I do. They’re microscopic fibers that clump and cast tiny shadows on the retina. I found out that they’re permanent, and my mother’s friend even claims to have learned to love hers. She’s given each one its own special name. 

Blind spots are very much like the floaters in our eyes. They mask what’s real. We search for what’s most valuable but to no avail. Yet again, it’s sitting right beneath our nose. 

How is it that we don’t see the obvious when it’s right in front of us? 

Our view is obstructed. We could be staring at the very thing that we’ve been seeking, but our lenses are faulty. 

All good light is being refracted. Our world is being deflected. It leaves us blind to what’s actually good in the world.

And when we manage to allow goodness to slip through, it’s doomed to bounce and pass obliquely through the floating grimy film tacked to our eyelids. 

The more shmutz that gets in our way, the more numerous our blind spots grow over time. Random fluctuations of data start to muddy our perception. Signals cross, and the good waves are easily misconstrued (What’s negative looks positive, and what looks positive is actually negative). 

A Wise Lense
Yehudah Ben Teima floats like an eagle. He sees the world from a bird’s-eye-view. As we’ve said before, he averts his eyes from that which may frustrate him, maintaining a clear-eye of the path that lies before him. 

He’s truly a wise person. 

Imagine what it would be like to see the world through a high speed, high definition telescopic lens. A wise person views objects from afar by developing and casting a much lower optical powered lens, affording them a high magnification, and a narrower angle of view.

It's wise to develop a keen lens which will allow you to zero in on what truly matters, while keeping the irrelevant and harmful things outside of your line of sight.

In actuality, we’re granted with this degree of clarity every day. Normally, we have to earn it, but every morning, like clockwork, our lenses are dusted clean. Our eyes are returned to a pristine state. They’re no longer obstructed, gifting you with a more discerning point of view. 

Imagine if you could wake up every morning with a fresh start, your vision revitalized, lenses corrected, and everything in your sight has become crystal clear. You wake up, bat your eyelids, rattle your head, and then realize that your field of perception is no longer encumbered.

You’re looking at the path before you through a high definition lens.

It’s not our job to rush out every morning to purchase a super absorbent microfiber cloth to wipe our eyes clean of the nightly shmutz. Instead, it’s Hashem who acts as our neighborly optical custodian. When we awaken every morning, it’s He who brushes the slumber from our eyes. It’s even better than our morning coffee. 

And Hashem doesn't just do this for you alone, but also extends this gift of clarity to the entire nation of Israel. In truth, He couldn’t be a better friend. And that’s because He refuses to let us remain amidst the nightly dust. He puts an end to the evening schmutz, waking us up bright-eyed, refreshed and focused, and with a brand new outlook on life. 

Every day, Hashem gives you a healthy start to your day.

When you wake up in the morning, it’s He who’s the first to arrive on the scene, showering you with His abundant loving kindness. And as a result, this friendly act also restores clarity to the whole world, granting you favor, kindness and mercy from all who gaze upon you.

Between Friends
We experience and acknowledge this phenomenon every day in our private morning discussions with Hashem. And to shed more light onto this eye-opening phenomenon, it’s essential to take a closer look at the relationship that exists between the strongest of friends. 

Do you remember the last time you stumbled into the middle of a private conversation? It probably didn’t take long to realize that the point that you were trying to interject fell flat. 

It simply wasn’t germane to the discussion at hand. 

It’s difficult to follow the gist of a conversation when we’ve missed out on its flow from the get-go. The banter that takes place between two friends is even more difficult to discern. It may appear open and playful on the surface, but joining in on the fun will only leave us feeling like an outsider. That’s because the space that exists between friends is sacred. 

Two friends have the uncanny ability to create an intimate, secure and highly equanimical environment. The communion between friends is private and contains many veiled themes and nuances. But the relationship as a whole isn’t eclipsed; it’s strangely noticeable to everyone else around them. 

The amity that exists between friends is left in plain view for all eyes to see. An onlooker wouldn’t mistake it for anything less than what it appears to be on the surface: a good friendship. 

The label we place on a container, shed, or storehouse is based solely on its content. Friendly discussions are also intimate, confined, and house plenty of private stuff. 

There are probably many words to describe a private discussion taking place between good friends. What name or title would you give it—what would you call it? 

The existing bond between friends plays an important role in the formation of brachos, blessings. In order for a blessing to be complete it must be consistent from start to finish. 

A blessing that doesn’t begin with Baruch Ata Hashem is considered to be left wide open, partial and incomplete. Baruch Ata HaShem is a way of saying, “You [Hashem] are the source of all blessing.” And when you end a blessing with Baruch Ata HaShem, it seals the deal, making the blessing complete and whole.

In short, blessings shouldn’t be left hanging. It’s unfriendly.

The Tosafists refer to a clever way to complete a fragmented blessing.  The trick is to join it with a blessing that’s adjacent to it. One that ends in Baruch Ata HaShem. The sages call this solution a b’racha hasemucha l'chaverta (lit. a blessing which is next to [or that relies on] its friend). 

That’s how we make a blessing whole and complete from beginning to end. Then it can contain one central theme from start to finish. The content which is sandwiched between the two friends is unified, robust, and is highly compelling. 

If you’re telling yourself that you’re sleeping through life, you should note the following. As we’ve indicated, Hashem removes the sleep from our eyes every morning. Every day, He wipes the soot clean from our eyelids. Hashem provides us with a fresh start and a new perspective every morning. The nasty shmutz that’s been muddying our perception has been removed. 

At dawn we thank Hashem for removing the slumber and sleep from our eyes, and this friendly morning blessing always begins with the words, Baruch Ata HaShem. 

Worthy of note, most siddurim instruct us not to give an answer to this blessing, i.e. forgo saying, amen. This suggests that in this case we don’t designate a break, or create the sort of separation that would normally exist between blessings. This way we’re able to narrow the gap, attaching the blessing to the content that quickly follows.

The next paragraph ends with Baruch Ata HaShem, but because it doesn’t start with this friendly introduction, the sages were troubled. So they decided to apply the b’racha hasemucha l'chaverta principle to resolve the situation. 

They officially placed the paragraph “next to its friend” by pairing it above with the “removing the sleep from our eyes” blessing. This indicates that the content which is sandwiched between our two juxtaposed friends is held to be particularly sacred. 

To get a closer glimpse of what may be Hashem’s greater intentions, and why He acts so kindly with us every day, let’s take a concentrated look at the content of our two friendly blessings, and highlight the central theme which they tend to encapsulate.

If you have a moment, grab your sidur and follow along with the translation of the following paragraph. You’ll notice that after we recognize that Hashem has kindly eradicated the nightly shmutz from our eyes, we trumpet, saying, “And may it be your will, Hashem! Our G-d, and the G-d of our forefathers, that you awaken us to Your Torah, and attach us to Your Mitzvos. Don’t bring us into the path of error, nor into the path of missteps and stumblings. Nor into the path of tests, nor into the path of scorn! Don’t let our Antagonist dominate us. Distance us from bad natured people and bad friends [who intend to lead us down the wrong path]. Glue us to our good nature and good deeds, and force our good nature to serve you [as we walk our own path]! And grant us today and every day favor, kindness and mercy in Your Eyes, and in the eyes of all who see us. And grant compassionate kindness upon us all. Baruch Ata HaShem, Who generously grants kindness upon His people Israel.”

Now that you’re fully awake, eyes clean and vision cleared, this friendly paragraph is providing you with a golden opportunity to ask for guidance. And it’s also an opportune time to request that Hashem help you to avoid anything negative that could potentially get in your way.

Urging Him to attach you to your good nature and your good deeds, and to place your good nature at the forefront of your mind, empowers you to cling to your path, serving Hashem with all of your might. 

And as we see, Hashem’s benevolence doesn’t just stop with you. He cares for the well-being of all people, and now that He’s opened the eyes of the entire world, we’re given the opportunity to petition that they find it in their hearts to look favorably upon us as well.

Let’s face it. We all require a guide to help us channel our own goodness. It’s not always so clear what the right thing is to do.

By sealing this friendly blessing with the words, “You [Hashem] are the source of all blessing, Who generously grants kindness upon His people Israel” —juxtaposed with the theme inherent in the earlier blessing — we may conclude that waking up in the morning and seeing things clearly is itself an act of kindness for us all. 

Removing the sleep and soot from our eyes, and being able to see things clearly (maybe even for the first time) is a gracious blessing for everyone.

We may also infer from the order of the blessing that in order to successfully channel our bad nature for the good, we’re first required to view ourselves and the world around us through spot-free lenses. 

The problem is that shmutz settles on our eyes during the night, and it muddies our perception. The Talmud refers to sleep as 1/60th of death, and suffice it to say, if it weren’t for Hashem’s help, we’d wake up still dead to the world. 

And how do we usually return our gratitude? 

We all hunger for a daily ounce of clarity, and Hashem lends it to us every morning in kind. In truth, the rest of the day is on us. We actually have to earn it. And that’s because after waking up wide-eyed, lenses unclouded and unrestricted, we quickly lose sight, and often stumble right into the muddy middle. 

None too swiftly, we spend the duration of the day tossing soot and dust right back into our eyes. 
 
It’s a dirty trick. 

>> Takeaways <<
	When your lenses are caked with shmutz it messes with the perception you have of yourself and the world around you.
	Nobody does anything wrong unless a crazy wind enters their mind. 
	In murky waters, people compensate by reaching for unhealthy externals, and trying to possess that which is outside of your own domain means that you’re unhappy with your lot.
	We’re always on the go, moving either forwards or backwards.
	The more shmutz that gets in our way, the more numerous our blind spots grow over time, and the more distorted our view becomes (What’s negative looks positive, and what looks positive is actually negative). 
	When Hashem wakes you up in the morning and wipes the soot from your eyes, your field of perception is no longer encumbered with the shmutz, giving you a fresh start and a new perspective.

________________________________________

 
Section IV: Your Whereabouts 
________________________________________
 

— Power of Distinction —

Are you feeling out of whack?
If so, you’re probably off balance, a bit distressed, and have fallen out of bounds. You’ve lost sight of your own limits—your boundaries are off kilter. 

This is because you’ve somehow lost track of your whereabouts.

Regaining an awareness of one’s whereabouts is essential for a person’s psychological health. This idea has trickled-down into Dr. Fritz Perls book, The Gestalt Approach & Eye Witness to Therapy. He indicates that a person who feels out of whack and has lost their capacity to differentiate, has a duty to re-establish this faculty. 

In his opinion, it’s the therapist's job to help you to rediscover yourself while at the same time provide clarity into what surely isn’t yourself; what fulfills you and what thwarts you. According to Dr. Perls, we need to be guided towards integration, and that requires seeking assistance in order to find the proper balance, and to discriminate the boundary point that exists between ourselves and the world around us.  

There’s a world-out-there. And it’s important to be able to distinguish between it and yourself. 

In order to achieve that we must first locate our own whereabouts. In the following meeting, you’ll witness the difficulty that Jack had in trying to find himself amidst all his anxiousness and doubt. 

Being Myself Spectrum 
Jack had just returned to dating after a six-month hiatus. He was very anxious, and expressed a lot of hesitation about going on his first date. He was plagued with doubt. 

The following discussion illustrates how he was able to overcome doubt by unleashing his power of distinction.

At the beginning of our talk, Jack was overflowing with uncertainty and fear. He stated, “I’m afraid I’m not going to be myself.” He was bubbling with worries and what ifs, wondering, “What if it doesn’t work out? How do you even know when you’re supposed to get engaged? Maybe I’m not good enough. Maybe I won’t like her at all.” 

We spoke at length about the power of doubt and his inability to differentiate. 

His biggest fear was that he wouldn’t be himself on the date. This gave me good reason to be alarmed. I questioned to myself, “If he isn’t going to be himself on the date, then who will he be?” 

I proceeded to etch onto a piece of paper the following Being Myself Spectrum, and asked him to draw a vertical line where he currently saw himself on the spectrum. 

Truth be told, I was curious, and I wanted some convincing. He seemed to be aware of times when he wasn’t being himself, so I wanted to check to see if he could pinpoint himself actually being himself right there in the moment. 

Being Myself

Not Feeling Like Myself --x---------------|------------------ Feeling Like Myself

As you may have imagined, he marked an x closer to the Not Feeling Like Myself end of the spectrum. It’s important to note that a person is unable to harness their power of distinction while caught feeling sidelined. 

That’s because they’re currently feeling not altogether like themselves. 

The tension, stress and discomfort that accompany this are a call to action!

It’s my job to first make sure that a person is fully present with me in the room. So with slight tongue-in-cheek, I mentioned to Jack how preposterous it all sounded to me—the fact that there are actually times in life when people believe that they’re not being themselves. If so, who the heck was sitting before me in the room? 

How could you not be yourself? 

Looking back at his Being Myself Spectrum, Jack admitted with a shake of the head, “It sounds totally ludicrous.” 

Yet people still feel this way. 

It’s helpful to remember that no matter how distant we may feel from being the person who we truly want to be, we can always locate ourselves somewhere along our very own Being Myself Spectrum. 

It doesn’t take long to realize that when you’re not being yourself, it’s still you; you’re simply being the particular aspect of yourself who doesn’t like being yourself.

Life Preserver 
Jack spoke at length about his anxiety. He was riddled with it. He claimed that it was the one thing that he felt was holding him back from being fully himself. 

Are you familiar with the famous parable of the life preserver? When a person’s feeling lost or out of sorts, their chest tends to tighten and breathing becomes labored. An episode like this is often likened to the experience of drowning. 

And that’s when it makes sense for us to reach for a life preserver. We feel that our life’s in danger and even if it only helps for a brief moment, clutching onto it makes us feel safe and secure. Jack’s cycle of anxiety was propelling him into a mode of preservation. The more anxious he felt, the less he perceived himself to be himself. And the more it bothered him, the more anxious he became. 

It’s nearly impossible to locate your whereabouts when stuck in preservation mode. Anxiety had become both a place of refuge, and the very thing Jack wanted to flee from. The moment that he’d sense a pang of anxiousness he’d instinctively try to protect and fortify himself. And what was it that he’d grab onto? That’s right, his old reliable anxiety. 

Power of Preservation
The moment that we deny any part of ourselves, we form a gap between the different aspects of who we are. Life becomes blurry, and we deprive ourselves of the ability to differentiate. We might not like it, but the lack of awareness of this peculiar part of ourselves sends us to a particularly memorable location. It catapults us right into the muddy middle.

And that’s when you can be sure that your power of preservation has fully kicked in. 

What sort of steps can you take to get out of preservation mode? A clever way out is to first embrace the aspect of yourself that wants to avoid being yourself. Once you’ve reintegrated yourself with the rest of yourself, your anxiety will magically dissipate. 

Don’t get me wrong. There’s a real benefit to feeling incomplete and torn virtually apart. The emotional and physical stress that we experience while in a state of preservation isn’t for naught. It has the power to sharpen our perception. It alerts us to the fact that although we thought we were perilously drowning, we can rest assured that we’re still very much alive and kicking. 

Our distress, disorder and difficulty also provides us natural benefits. Let’s say you mistakenly step out onto the road into oncoming traffic. The moment that you feel distressed and become anxious, your power of preservation quickly swoops in to the rescue.

It gets your adrenaline pumping. 

The power of preservation is the force that tells our body to jump out of the way of the oncoming car. Thank goodness for our instincts. And to boot, leaping off the road and surviving such a precarious event is sure to always make a great story. 

And it really leaves an impression. 

It doesn't take long for our subconscious mind to learn that this particular coping mechanism can also be applied to future events. We just have to learn how to guide it. On its own, it doesn’t know when it’s being used for the good or for the bad. 

If you know that you’re going to have an important meeting tomorrow, and if you’re like Jack, feelings of what if’s and your fear of the unknown will likely begin to flutter. That’s the very moment when your Antagonist will show up and declare, “Hey Jack, you don’t want to be yourself right now.”

That’s how we know when our power of preservation has stopped working in our favor. The quicker we catch on to this possible overstep the wiser we’ll be. 

Been There, Done That
Now that Jack was fully present in the room, and before he headed out, we were able to discuss his long-term goal of learning how to manage his feelings of doubt. The unique thing about doubt is that it’s our Antagonist’s doing. It’s not who we are, but a foreign idea filled with ill intentions.

Jack decided that being in control of his thoughts would be a good first step. As long as he could push the doubt aside, he could ignore its influence. The following is a wonderful case of been there, done that.

Jack came back the next week and indicated that he’d given doubt some thought. He said, “I did all the work in my head.” He succeeded at giving it distinction. He started to see it as its own thing—an entity in and of itself. 

He recognized it as having its own power, and hoped this to be the first step towards letting it go and letting it just be. “The date went well,” he reported. 

Just as soon as he began sharing his dating experience, his penchant for uncertainty resurfaced. He began to obsess, wondering, “What does she want? What is she actually looking for?” 

Worrying about all this future stuff made him noticeably anxious. I sat in silence with him. Suddenly, with bright blue eyes he miraculously declared, “This is my obsession with anxiety coming back!” 

Jack had started to see his anxiety for what it truly is. He realized that his Antagonist was just using it as a tool to knock him off balance and throw him off track. In order to clearly see your adversary’s shenanigans, like Jack, you’ll need to unholster your tool of daas—your power of distinction.

The Rambam in his Yesodei HaTorah infers that we were imbued with this power of distinction at birth.  It’s not just what permits us to see our Antagonist for what it’s really about, but it also allows us to see ourselves as a whole being, and an entity of ourselves. 

Setting yourself apart is what transforms you into a real mensch. Distinguishing ourselves from the noisy crowd gives us the veneer of being both efficient and self-sufficient. You have what it takes to be your own person. There’s nothing greater than being self-assured of your own whereabouts. 

>> Takeaways <<
	It’s important to differentiate the line between who you are and the world around you.
	There’s a particular aspect of yourself who doesn’t like being yourself, but it’s still a vital part of yourself.
	Your struggle has the potential to become both your foe and your life preserver.
	Denying any part of yourself forms a gap between the different aspects of yourself, depriving yourself of the ability to differentiate, catapulting yourself into a state of personal discord.
	When you feel distressed and become anxious, your power of preservation quickly swoops in to your rescue.
	Your power of distinction permits you to see your Antagonist for what it really is, and to see yourself as a whole being, and an entity of yourself. 

________________________________________


 
— Persona Non Grata —

Outside-In 
The awareness of how embracing unhealthy externalities affects a person negatively, has also permeated the modern world of psychology. Dr. Fritz Perls, the developer of Gestalt Therapy, warns that if we take an outside-in approach, we’re bound to “incorporate into ourselves standards, attitudes, and ways of acting and thinking, which are not truly ours.” 

What’s the problem with soliciting this external persona non grata? 

Inviting the outside world into our inner world is a form of what Dr. Perls calls, introjection. This apparent lack of boundaries brings peril to our very core, as he warns, “In introjection, we have moved the boundary of the world so far inside ourselves that there is almost nothing left of us.” 

When we don’t have a mind of our own it’s like we’re a nobody. And when we’re a nobody, we lack a world of our very own.

It’s possible to completely lose our whereabouts when approaching the world from the outside-in. 

Inside-Out 
To be one step ahead of your Antagonist, you’ll need to follow King David’s lead, and start to approach life from the inside-out. The decision making process, and the choices that we make in life must start from within the inner chambers of our heart. 

How do you create a healthy set of lenses through which to view your outer world? 

As we’ve already determined, our eyes are very impressionable. This is something every wise person knows. 

Working from the inside-out, inspires our heart to guide our eyes in a more favorable direction. When done right, it awakens our healthy desires, and helps us to realize what we truly value in life. 

Over time, it becomes easier to limit our scope, and we begin to zero in on the good parts. We only allow the right messages to filter in, focus on the best in people, and begin to illustrate in our mind the necessary positive images which help us to reach our life’s goals. 

According to Rabbi Chaim Friedlander (1923-1986) in his book Mesilos Chaim B’Chinuch, (I translate it as--Living Pathways in Education), the manner in which we perceive our world is a pedagogical issue. 

We’ve been bombarded with an outside-in approach from the outset. Since the very first moment that we opened and batted our eyelids, our parents, extended family, and other outside influencers have tried to shape our reality. 

And I’m sure that they’ve always meant well.

They’re only human and people are known to make mistakes. If these influencers haven’t managed to speak directly to your heart, then you’ve most likely been trying to maneuver your way through a dense layer of external shmutz for many years by now. 

Western culture promulgates an outside-in approach as well. People are so worried about how things might appear on the surface. We’re living in very superficial times. The lifestyles of the rich and famous are more about aesthetics than authentic personal values, meaning and growth. 

Movies, television, and the fashion industry have been dictating how we and our children are required to look and behave. We perceive and rate ourselves based on the images that we see and the messages that they provide. Negative outside forces are quick to usurp our personal ambition and misdirect our unique energies. Be aware: Any battle that you unleash against their expectations is only in reaction to their powerful nature and influence. 

It’s easy to slip into preservation mode when we sense that our basic values are being disrespected or disregarded. This reactive approach is bound to spill over, muddying our personal relationships, and corrupting the perception we have of the world around us. 

When we’re not taking a proactive stance to the outside world, we’re stuck living an outside-in cycle of life.

Our current educational system is no exception.

Rabbi Chaim Friedlander (1923-1986), the famed educational director at Yeshivas Ponovezh, concurs that the most common educational style can be described as an outside-in approach.  

Every teacher hopes to have a positive influence on their students, but the real point of contention is how we choose to relate the information to them in the first place. It doesn’t matter how sharp-witted a person may be, it’s always difficult for an educator to get an idea across, to successfully communicate it in a way that it may directly enter into another person’s heart. How do you take wisdom and inject it into someone else's heart? 

The common outside-in approach demands that a student study and learn to incorporate information on their own. In this case, students tend to do better when provided with the study tools and the guidance necessary to learn and retain the information.

However you look at it, this approach requires the student to do most of the work. 

Obviously, the instructor wants us to mull it over. That requires turning it over and over until we can claim it as our own. Once we come to fully understand the information, we’re expected to inculcate it into our very being. It then has the ability to enlighten us, influence our perception of reality, and ultimately affect who we are as a person. 

Unfortunately, this style of learning can very much leave a person feeling handicapped. It’s misleading, and the biggest issue is that we’re more likely to stop looking inwards for answers. It fools us into thinking that connecting to outside sources and ideas is the only way to learn, grow and develop ourselves. 

If you can relate to this phenomenon it’s most likely because you sense that your internal creative powers and intuitive technical know-how were hijacked somewhere along the way. If so, it’s possible that what you honestly value has been masked by living and learning strictly from the outside-in.



Inside-In
I thought that the opposite of an outside-in modus operandi would have been an inside-out approach, but according to R’ Friedlander, the ability to truly connect and relate to another person demands an inside-in perspective.

An inside-in approach places the ball into the hands of the instructor. The assumption is that a teacher can’t move anyone further than they’ve moved themselves. That means that they have to do the work first. 

It’s only after we’ve sufficiently turned over the material to where it's become a part of ourselves, that we’re now fit to teach it over to another. Our efforts to master the material ignites our heart and allows us to pay it forward. This is by far the most direct route for the dissemination of information. 

This delivery system works from the inside to the inside. In short, it’s a heart to heart.

It’s time to cultivate your inner power, and to awaken yourself to yourself. I’m not suggesting an outward display, a big performance, or some type of public exhibition. Personal transformation is meant to be an intimate endeavor. 

After awaking yourself to the wisdom that’s living within your heart, you may then reach out to the people closest to you, and seek to unlock a doorway into their hearts as well. 

>> Takeaways <<
	Adopting an outside-in approach moves the boundary of the world so deep inside of yourself that almost nothing of you remains.
	It’s essential to learn what healthy messages to filter in, to focus on the best in people, and to illustrate in your mind the positive images necessary to reach your life’s goals. 
	An inside-in approach assumes that you can’t move anyone further than you’ve moved yourself.
	Personal transformation is a private matter. 
	The best way to transfer information is by having a heart-to-heart.

________________________________________

 
— Patterns —

“I don’t know who to turn to, or where to go. I don’t know where I’m headed anymore. I’ve lost track of what’s important. I’m tired of feeling stuck. I don’t know how I got into this mess. How do I get out of here, and even if I did, how can I be sure that I won’t just fall right back into this negative state all over again?” 

If any of those phrases sound familiar to you, it’s totally normal, and it stinks when someone is having such a hard time. They’re right in the middle of it. And I know, it always seems eternal when we’re stuck smack dab in the muddy middle. 

People go through difficult periods in their lives. 

Are you starting to see a pattern? Maybe you’re tired of seeing the same old themes resurface in your life. It’s frustrating when people can’t seem to move on. 

There are some people who appear to keep on keeping on. They stride forward. Whether they’re stuck in a negative state for a few hours, a couple of days, weeks or months, they do seem to eventually break out of their unhealthy pattern. 

There’s an end, and once they reach it, they move on. But for them, moving on means that they’re just falling back into their old routine. 

Does that really sound like a clean exit? In spite of the fear of getting stuck all over again, they do seem to be able to continue on with their lives. 

I wonder what tools and guiding principles they’re implementing to so easily be able to stride onward.

That said, aren’t they still afraid of returning to and falling prey to their greatest concerns? If so, this may be an indicator that they’ve never really broken the chain. 

Maybe it’s all just a pattern. They decide to move forward, subsequently fall into the middle of the muck—get stuck, and when they somehow, miraculously, get themselves unstuck, they continue forward until they lose balance and stumble all over again. 
Foreseeable Patterns 
A good diagnostician knows that the trick to identifying a person’s greatest concerns comes down to foreseeable patterns. How many times do you need to do something before it can be considered a pattern in your life? 

Maybe one action is enough to put things into motion. One infusion may be all that it takes to foster the fuel necessary to inspire us to repeat it. This would be well and good if it were a positive action, but Ben Azai adds in his mishnah that the flipside is also disturbingly true. He states that the consequence of doing a negative act is doing another one. 

As a result of our initial negative action, the Rabbeinu Yonah (Rabbi Jonah ben Abraham Gerondi; died 1264) explains that a severe gap forms between ourselves and Hashem. All it takes is but a split second to quickly forsake what’s most important in our lives. 

We may conclude from this that one negative act is all it takes to toss an iron wrench into our efforts to realize our life’s potential. It's no wonder that this causes us to feel torn, distant and thoroughly farmisht. 

It’s this existential residue that inclines us to repeat such a self-defeating act. “At this point what do you really care, you’re already feeling out of sorts, just go ahead and do it (again)!” your Antagonist persists.

Hashem wants us to choose life! 

In line with the Rabbeinu Yonah, Hashem doesn’t place good or bad into our hands, but choice alone. Hashem stresses this by commanding, 

“I have set before you life and death, the blessing and the curse. You shall choose life, so that you and your offspring will live.”  

He wants you to choose what’s best for you. If you choose well, it means that you’ve chosen life. When you choose to walk a good path, Hashem walks it with you. When you do the right thing, He helps make it easier for you to do another. 

When we slip up, a vacuum forms between us and Hashem, and this opens us up to the ill-fated powers inherent in the outside world. 

The experience of being stuck in a negative flow can be explained by simple physics. When we stumble, we’re slated to stumble again, and that’s because of the inertia we’ve created with the initial negative act. 

The Rav Bartenura explains that this is our reward. Our reward for doing the first negative act is a golden opportunity to do another. 

Adding to this, the Rav states that we get credit for both the benefit and pleasure that we received from doing the initial wrong deed. Making a poor decision, and also enjoying its benefits, is what ultimately rewards us with another. 

In other words, you slipped up, enjoyed it, and now you’re in double trouble.

You’ve earned your reward! It’s the fruit of your labor. You’re a success, slated to continue your ill-driven actions. But in truth, it’s lonely at the top. 

The Rabbeinu Yonah reveals that if we choose the bad, Hashem will distance himself from us. When we’re completely married to our bad actions, Hashem wants no part in it. 

But we really don’t have to be alone. Once we’re caught in this negative flow, and we find it nearly impossible to get out on our own, we can always utilize our power of return. The power is in your hands to turn yourself right around—to run directly home.

Power of Return
Nobody enjoys feeling the pangs of regret, but they’re often the best motivators to start harnessing our power of return. We may bounce back on track just by following three thoughtful steps. 

The first step is to decide in our heart that a particular behavior isn’t befitting a person like ourselves. We know it’s second-rate, and repeating it wouldn’t be prudent. You may even find yourself saying, “I’m not the sort of person who would do such a thing.” We can be self-assured that this one misstep does not have to lock us into a pattern. It doesn’t have to represent the person who we’ve been striving to be all along. 

The second step is to mourn the person who we think we’ve become. This allows us the time to take pause to recalibrate, and imagine ourselves becoming the person who we truly want to be. 
The third step turns us right around. It returns us to our initial state. But this step is tricky. Reaching ground zero requires much fortitude. That means that when confronted with the very same challenge, on this go around, we must decide not to repeat the initial act. A wise person might say, “I’m not going there again. I’m staying far away from that unhealthy thought or behavior. I’m sticking to what’s best for me.”
	
It’s not just the same old story with a positive twist in the end. It’s your return ticket home. It’s a brand new story. And as its author, you may confidently use this fresh start to place your right foot forward, and to begin living more authentically.

There shouldn't be any need to look back after making the decision. We can simply consider that old negative action as a common hiccup, a small blip in the greater scheme of life. It’s a one-off and nothing’s really been altered. 

A wise person knows that there’s simply no good reason to continue with it any further. Achieving this means that we have a chezkas kashrus. We’re still kosher. We’ve successfully reached ground zero. Once there isn’t any proof of our past deeds—not having tweaked our life permanently for the worst—we’re considered to be what’s called muchzack. 

Meaning, we haven’t changed our standing in the least. We automatically fall back into our original, default status. We slide ourselves right back into home plate. A wise person knows that one overstep doesn’t have to mean that you’re bound to relive it.

In truth, we can crack any bad habit by mobilizing our power of return. It’s simply easier to bounce back when negativity hasn't been given the time to take hold. The more habituated we’ve become, the more clever we need to be in order to shake our unhealthy ways.

Habituation
When does an action start to take hold and really become a habit? 

Between implementing a bit of self-awareness and our power of return, one misstep does not need to be habit forming. Nonetheless, with enough heedlessness and measured dedication, our negative actions can take full hold. 

Adopting any new practice demands a certain amount of time and effort. It doesn’t have to be a huge endeavor, but to integrate a new way of being into our daily life, we have to give it at least a couple of tries. 

A Talmudic discussion between Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel and Rebbi reveals that repeating something two to three times is all it takes to establish a fixed pattern: 

	According to Rebbi, an action becomes habitual when it has been repeated twice under the very same conditions; but 
	Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel requires three times in order to really make it stick. 

That’s how easily a negative action can become a part of our reality. Replicating it just a few times is enough to cause the changeover. The real turning point, though, is when you’ve begun to define yourself by it. That means for whatever reason you’ve started to own it—you’ve fully dedicated yourself to it. 

And if you’re even willing to go public with it, people might say, “You’re owning up to it.” 

According to the Talmud, if we’ve managed to hold onto a parcel of land that we inherited or acquired for three full years, we’re believed to be the owner of that land. You’re able to say, “I’m a landowner, and hey, that’s my land.” It can’t be disputed. 

But let’s say we have no deed, no contract or any proof of purchase. If the original owner comes and claims, “Hey, I was just renting it to you,” and you haven’t reached your three-year mark, you can’t prescribe it as your own. You may even owe them a pretty penny for a portion of the produce that you’ve grown and sold on their land. 

Three years grants us security. We can treat the land as if it was ours all along. We can define ourselves by it, continue to invest our time into it, and nobody else can dispute it. 

Themes
How do patterns play out as themes in our narrative? 

Let’s say that you’ve repeated a negative action at-least three times. How would you describe yourself now? It’s important to be really specific because it’s going to be the governing theme in your story. Would you say that you’ve been feeling down, anxious, stressed or out of control as of late? 

Maybe you’re haunted by doubts, struggling with making decisions, or just downright frustrated. If so, is this a new thing for you, or has it been a concern in your life for a while? 

If you’re apt to find yourself in this same old situation over and over again then you know it’s become a running theme in your life’s script. 

Has anyone ever chided you, “Nu, why don’t you just get over it?” 

If you recognize that it’s become a pattern, you're certainly ahead of the curve. We get tired of seeing the same old negative themes resurface in our lives. And it’s frustrating when we still can’t seem to move on. It’s also rough when it appears that other people seem to be moving forward in life with ease. 

Is that their real story? 

It may be true for a select few, but like we said before, most people are stuck in one negative state or another. Even if they appear to miraculously break out of their vicious cycle, they truly haven’t advanced one step in the right direction. 

Returning to what they consider to be their normal routine is categorically still a part of their negative ebb and flow. It may be for them a place of contentment, but like any other negative pattern, they’re destined to find themselves standing before the same uncomfortable precipice in the near future. 

This is how their theme always plays out. They may be adept at walking away from negativity, but they always fail to create the necessary disconnect. It’s truly remarkable how anyone may continue to stay firm, and in spite of impending doom, seem to continue living normal fulfilling lives. 

The chaotic nature of their lives is composed of a recycled theme. This is what some experts refer to as organized chaos. Meaning, they may experience life as chaotic, but they’re really just stuck hovering in a fixed pattern. 

When life has become predictably unpredictable, it has its benefits. That’s because it’s become our norm. Although we may just be treading in muddy waters, we always have the option of falling back on our standard routine. 

Your Norm
There’s security in having a routine. It works. It's reliable. It’s your modus operandi, and nobody else can take that away from you. It’s your norm. 

Why would we even want to make a change? Maybe this is the quality of life for which we’ve always hoped. But if we're feeling negative about it, why would we keep on doing it?

After taking a few cracks at doing a negative behavior, we do succeed at actualizing some of its potential. No matter how unhealthy it may be, it appears to have become a part of our very being. The manner in which we think about it, and the degree to which we’re committed to maintain it, are now fetter for life’s most important and pressing decisions. As strange as it may sound, this unhealthy behavior gives our life purpose!

Not only has it become accepted—it’s expected. To a great extent we’re enslaved by it. How could we make a life decision without it? It’s become our point of reference, the lens through which we view our world and the world around us. 

When our negative patterns become our norm, it makes them very difficult to go up against. Take note: Over time, they have the extraordinary ability to lose their original lacquer. 

Meaning, they no longer appear to be negative, and begin to take on a whole new meaning. If we’re not wise to this, we may get caught identifying ourselves by them in a new way. We may rewrite our narrative to fit their newly scripted purpose, remaining blind to their hidden and nefarious plan. 

The Third Link
So you're stuck in a negative groove. Many people are. Does that mean your next move is going to be just another link in the chain?

We’ve established that doing an action three times transforms it into a reality—into our reality. And the more that we come to repeat it, the more it clouds our world view. 

The Maharal likens our third act to the third link in a chain. Every additional link has the potential to darken our perception. We may easily conclude that every new link is just another loop in a series of bad actions. But is our behavior really that predictable? Are all events necessarily linked to one another?

Unhealthy behavior is but a direct result of our first actions, and due to this, our Antagonist makes every effort to convey that this third link implies that we’re doomed to repeat it, but in truth, it’s only yanking our chain. 

To the wise eye, this third link is more shifty than it appears. Although it’s an outgrowth of the initial two, it holds the capacity to be both connected and disconnected from them through and through. Meaning to say, although the second link in the chain is undoubtedly linked to the first, and the third directly to the second, the third link is so distant from the first that it’s become something entirely brand new (Maharal, Pirkei Avos). 

When we’re tired of reliving the same old negative patterns in life, the third link in the chain is our ticket out. Since we may view our behavior as something that’s disconnected from our initial act, we may stop the flow with this built-in fail-safe. Without it, we’d always be stuck feeling like just another link in the chain. 

Thanks to the apparent gap which exists between the first and third link, any desire to continue our behavior is now going to be solely based on a totally new and different reason. 

It can’t help but serve a new function.

And although the first two links are what helped us arrive at this newly desired purpose, the new break in flow allows us to decide whether or not to continue to let our behavior define who we are from here on in.

The inherent disconnect is what permits us to do the wise thing. The gap gives us pause, allowing us to place our focus inwards. We may then ask ourselves, “Why am I still doing this? Is continuing this action really in my best interests? Is it who I am? Is this thing what I truly value?” 

It’s normal to think that we’re always going to be stuck in the flow—that we’re destined to forever be linked to our first actions. But we don’t have to be ruled by inertia. At any point, we may take pause to reflect, reorient and redirect. The wise person knows that no matter how many links down the chain we may be, we can always stop to inquire, “Is it worth continuing with this particular behavior or thought pattern?” 

You don’t have to be chained to your past thoughts and actions. We own the ability to set ourselves free. Thanks to the fail-safe, we may unleash our power of imagery, and imagine ourselves boldly snipping away at the chain with a pair of ethereal metal clippers. 

Why not? We’re far removed from whatever linked us to it in the first place. In line with the Maharal, it’s even become a brand new animal. We get to decide whether to feed it or not. In order to stride forward, it’s wise to view this negative behavior as ancient history. It’s just an old story, and that’s what makes it all the more possible to simply leave it behind. 

>> Takeaways <<
	There are people who appear to keep on keeping on, but for them, moving on really just means that they’re just falling back into their old routine. 
	Choosing what’s in your best interest is choosing life!
	A wise person knows that one misstep doesn’t have to mean that you’re bound to relive it.
	It takes two to three tries under the same condition for an action to take full hold.
	There’s safety to routine. So why change?
	Prophetic imaginings lend you the uncanny ability to predict your future thoughts and actions. 
	You don’t have to be stuck feeling like just another link in the chain.

________________________________________

 
Section V: The Daily Grind
________________________________________

— The Hungry Bear —

The Beast Within 
“He created the wild beast on earth; He created the wild beast in humanity.” 


The words of the serpent piqued the curiosity of our first lady, asserting, “You will not die, for Hashem knows that on the day that you eat of it, your eyes will be opened and [just like Hashem ate from the tree] you will be like Him, knowing good and bad.”  

When her gaze fell upon the lovely fruit, she was instantly smitten, as Hashem’s Torah reveals: “And the woman saw that the tree was good for eating and that it was a delight to the eyes.”  She gave the fruit to her husband. In the moment that he ate from it, both of their eyes were held wide open.  Badness was seen all around them and they hungered for it. It’s as if a beast with a strong desire to consume everything in the world (both bad and good) was planted inside of them.  

This hungry monster is strangely reminiscent of the second beast that the prophet Daniel envisioned in his dream. He envisaged, “Then behold! Another beast, a second one, similar to a bear; it was placed on one side, and there were three ribs in its mouth between its teeth; and this is what they said to it, ‘Arise, devour much flesh!’”  

Giving us a glimpse into the prophet's vision, Rav Yosef describes a creature that desires food and drink, and is as woolly as a bear. It’s never satisfied, and is constantly on the prowl—without rest. It’s a hungry wandering bear.  

In other words, it’s a consumer. The greatest ever: It won’t stop until it’s swallowed up everything in the universe.

Inner Hunger
When we feel that something’s missing, and we sense an empty pit in our heart, we’re bound to experience an inner hunger. This hunger triggers a hankering which is difficult to curb. When we’re craving something, our hungry bear takes hold, and our only concern is to fill the empty hole.

And this causes many people to go out on the prowl.

According to Rabbi Eliyahu Dessler, hunger is basically a reaction to a weakness or discomfort that’s triggered by an existing inner deficiency. 

“Hunger isn’t life itself,” he admits, but is just there to give us the necessary boost to stay alive. 

He adds, whether “for good or for bad,” our different appetites are “emissaries of our heart’s inclinations.” Namely, our desires are an outgrowth of an emptiness which pangs somewhere within the chambers of our heart. 

The downside to our appetites is that they often send us down the wrong path. And it doesn’t help that they’re so incredibly relentless. It’s hard to stop them dead in their tracks. 

Once feeling hungry, we don’t just hunger for now. Intensified by what might happen, our hunger perks its enthusiasm, gearing us up for any potential consumption down the road. And there’s no end to this desire. The hungry beast will never be satisfied. And the more that we attempt to indulge its cravings, the more intense our hunger becomes. And this is what makes the hungry bear the most miserable of creatures. 

Your Lot
Why are we so doggedly determined to fulfill our desires? Maybe it’s because we’re not satisfied with our lot.

Isn’t it all for naught? No matter how ambitious we are about feeding our appetites, we’re never going to fully make our mark. There’s no such thing as being totally fulfilled in this world, as the Midrash purports, “No person leaves this world with half of their desires fulfilled.”  

So why do we keep on latching onto things that don’t serve our best interests? Attaching ourselves to something that isn’t fitting for us just leads to more psychological pain and unnecessary tension.

In line with R’ Dessler, what we’re doing is beastly. We’re acting like an animal who’s attempting to mark its territory. We’re trying to extend our personal domain—we want to get our mitts on that which is outside of ourselves simply because it’s outside of ourselves.  

Maybe it’s time we got into our thick woolly heads that what we’re already receiving is enough. What we’re hungry for lies nearby. And that our efforts to explore outside of ourselves are in vain. 

It’d be better that we expend all of this hungry energy trying to find answers from within. 

The heart’s intentions can either be for the good or for the bad. There’s an upside to having an inner hunger. We may direct all of our spirited ambition towards doing good things in the world! 

The hungry bear yearns to feel satisfied, and it’ll be on the prowl until it’s consumed pretty much everything. In other words, it wants to gain control of the entire physical environment. It does this by expanding its influence to all four corners of the earth. 

Our inner hunger is no different. The heart yearns to reach beyond itself. This can be used for the positive. Our legs are just itching to run to do goodness in the world. You have a natural inclination to want to do the right thing for yourself and for the people around you. That’s a much more noble reason to take your hunger global!

Need for Attachment
Have you considered that maybe your hunger has a spiritual side? 

The bear cub in us wants to fulfill its need for attachment. The pangs of emptiness that we experience are actually there to inspire us to want to connect to something which is much greater than ourselves. 

Your soul is reaching out, and you’re yearning to cling to the infinite. 

As long as we’re not satisfied with our portion, we’re slated to stay on the prowl, so it’s in our better interests to start directing our ambition towards more healthy and spiritual pursuits. The more ambitious we are about performing acts of kindness for others, the more we succeed at satisfing our own need for attachment. 

When we make a wholehearted effort to do some good in the world, it doesn’t just stop there. Doing good things for others gets us juiced up, and energizes us to want to do more. And our friends benefit from this as well. They also have a need for attachment.

It's important to be mindful when seeking attachment. If we’re not fully on the ball, our Antagonist will make every effort to trick us into latching onto the wrong things. It distracts us into tasting its sweet nothings. How does it lure you into its sticky trappings? By placing them just a bit outside of your immediate realm. 

It sugar-coats everything.

It knows that we’re naturally drawn towards externals. And hopes that we won’t hesitate to wrap our sticky claws around that which is found directly outside of ourselves.

The Honeytrap
The honeypot—it’s a trap. You should be warned of its perils. Acting on our desires can easily veer us off track, and if we’re not careful, we’ll go right to pot. We’re bound to totally lose ourselves in the process. 

Running after what our heart and eyes desire leads us astray. That’s why our inner hunger comes with a warning label. Moshe was commanded to inform Israel: ”Do not explore after your hearts and after your eyes so that you’ll be nourished by them.”  

It’s a trap, alright. What our eyes see is what we get. And what our heart seeks, we shall find. It’s a self-fulfilling prophecy! The moment that we stick our mitts into the honeypot, we’re seized by its sweet-smelling aroma. And after tasting a bit of its syrupy honey, our thirst is quenched. We feel nourished by it, but only for a fleeting moment. 

Moshe’s telling us that once caught in the honeytrap, we feel satiated. Why else would we keep coming back? We return for another taste because it actually works. It’s reliable. 

If we want it, and we go for it, we’ll surely be sustained by it. Hashem loves us each like an only child. Whatever we request, and however unhealthy it may be, He’ll grant it to us. We’ve always got our hand on the family trust.

It’s so easy to get stuck in our Antagonist’s trap. It knows exactly how to attract us. It exploits our strongest appetites. And it always knows how to lure us back. Once caught with our hand in the cookie jar, we become dizzy-eyed, and lose focus on what’s truly important in life. 

The honeytrap may be nourishing, but it’s really just a bunch of empty calories. When addicted to its confections, we’re bound to feel even more empty and lost without it. 

Like a wandering bear, we’ll be seen stomping into every confectionary store looking for just a little lick while on our way towards nowhere. 

>> Takeaways <<
	When the hungry bear takes hold, your only concern is to fill the empty hole.
	Latching on to externals just means that we’re trying to extend our territory, our personal domain.
	You have an inner hunger to connect to something which is much greater than yourself.
	Our Antagonist sugar-coats everything.
	Doing acts of kindness for others satisfies your need for attachment. 
	What your heart seeks, you shall find. It’s a self-fulfilling prophecy!
	Your Antagonist may exploit your strongest appetites, but it’s really just a bunch of empty calories.

________________________________________

 
— Eye-Candy —

Are you unable to pass a candy store without entering? 

When you walk past the store, and your heart starts to flutter, that’s when you know that your eyes must have been seized by the eye-candy openly displayed in the window. 

That thinking is very much in line with Yehuda Ben Teima. To protect our heart from filling with desire, we have to be looking ahead from a bird’s-eye view. When we’re hyper focused on our eyes, we can then in turn guard our heart, preventing us from dancing right into the intriguing store. 

I’m not sure if Yehuda Ben Teima ever walked passed a Cinnabon, but we all know their secret. They’ve been pumping their sweet sugary-cinnamon smells out into the malls for years. The whole point is to excite us into prancing up to the counter with our rolled up coins to buy their legendary made-from-scratch tasty cinnamon rolls.

When Moshe counseled us not to explore outside of ourselves, it was because he knew that looking towards externals would cause us to go astray. He did this by alerting us to the honeyed desires that exist within our hearts. And for him, our eyes come in a close second. 

Moshe wanted to emphasize that once your heart’s been struck by desire, if you pursue it, the next thing you know you’ll be munching on a yummy sugary bun. It’s an easy theorem: You desire it, you see it, you eat it.

When we want something badly enough, we’ll do everything in our power to get it. If we get a whiff of it, we might even be willing to roam an entire mall in order to discover it.

Yehuda Ben Teima must have also known about this phenomenon. He knows we all wrestle with an inner hunger. Suffice it to say, he has more faith in us than we may imagine. If our heart becomes excited from a sweet smell, he trusts that we’ll decide to avert our eyes, and not to seek that which we desire. 

You know what’ll happen if you do. You’ll find it! And when you see it, you’ll roll right into Cinnabon’s legendary honeytrap. 

It’s impossible to know what initially triggers the craving. It could be a smell or a thought that brings to mind a fond memory, or a sight in a shop window that catches our eye. Either way, it’s your heart that tells you: “You’ve gotta have it.” 

Back in World War II, when my dad was in the U.S Navy, they had a mantra for the mess hall: “Take what you want, but eat all you take.”

We’ve all put too much food on our plates at one time or another. “I can’t finish it all,” we declare. That’s when we can always count on somebody to quip, “I guess your eyes were much bigger than your stomach.” 

Insatiable
When we’ve overfilled our plate it can be quite embarrassing. We feel guilty. We’ve been working so hard to curb our cravings, and yet we realize that this time we overdid it. It’s easy to judge yourself too harshly. 

But do we stop to think who’s really doing the judging?

Many people prefer to just wallow in it. It’s much easier to feel down and get sad about our mistakes. The problem is that sadness leads to laziness. You know you’re pretty far gone when you start to relish in it. 

Feeding these negative and unhealthy messages is a clever way to permit ourselves to continue feeling down. It’s the perfect excuse. And if we keep at it, over time, we probably won’t even recall what life was like without them. 

It’s hard to imagine that anyone could be so dedicated to this negative behavior, but truth be told, it’s possible that we’ve even forgotten why we started to relish it in the first place. 

Complacent 
Laziness is sticky. It leads to being complacent. No matter how little we try, we still won’t be totally satiated. But it doesn’t really matter anymore. It just seems easier to wade around in our lowliness. 

At least, it’s something we can be sure of.

I know it’s difficult to shake these negative messages. Deep down, we just want to let them go and stride forward. My heart goes out to all of the people stuck in this muddy middle. It’s like they’ve met their match, and they’ve decided that there’s no longer any point in trying. 

It doesn’t help that when in a really low place, our efforts to climb out are always being met with opposition. It’s defeating. When we feel at a loss, our Antagonist is compelled to repeat its message: “You might as well just go for it. No matter what you do, it won’t be enough. You’ll still be deficient and incomplete anyhow.”

A Brand New Routine 
This is the nature of a bad routine. Like a wandering bear, we continue to pursue that which we expect will fulfill us. We press on because we hope that it will free us from our emptiness, and the pains of hunger that pang from deep within. 

A bad routine takes off the edge. When we gulp down that next drink, take that next hit, or swallow that next bite, it’ll suffice, but the relief is only short-lived. We won’t really be satiated—at least not for the long-term. 

We’ve accustomed oursleves to it. It’s become the status quo. It’s a bad habit, and as we indicated before, we all know that it’s hard to change routine.

King David spells out for us a clever way to start anew, and how to leave those old routines behind. Instead of continuing to feed our hungry bear with garbage, he clarifies the path to becoming an upstanding person.

Hashem loves us. Whatever we want, He’ll give it to us. When we start to seek that which is in our best interests, he’ll help us find it and to achieve it. King David indicates that when you endeavor to do something good for yourself or a friend, Hashem will help you to see it to completion. 

Feeding your hunger with something healthy and positive makes you the wiser for it.

Instead of filling ourselves up on the bad, we’re now satiating our appetites with the good, and as King Solomon relates, “An upstanding person eats to satisfy their soul, but the belly of the wicked will feel hungry [lacking].”  

When things are amiss, and we start to look for the good in everyone and everything, each bite of goodness will start rebuilding for us a brand new routine. The old status quo will become passé. 

King Solomon appears to think that this new habit of doing acts of kindness is a worthy routine to get into. It’s the best way to curb our appetite. In time, we  may transform ourselves into becoming real menschen, and as he repeatedly promises, “Hashem will never starve the soul of the upstanding person.”  

>> Takeaways <<
	When you’re hyper focused on your eyes, you may in turn guard your heart, preventing you from dancing right into your Antagonist’s trap. 
	It’s easy to judge yourself too harshly when you’ve given into your cravings.
	When something catches your eye, it’s your heart that tells you: “You’ve gotta have it.” 
	Once caught in the honeytrap, we feel satiated, but only for a fleeting moment. 
	When in a low place, our efforts to climb out are met with opposition.
	Doing acts of kindness curbs your appetites, and in time, you’ll have transformed yourself into becoming a real mensch

________________________________________

 
— Mighty as a Lion —

Roaring Outta Bed
How do you wake up in the morning?

Every morning Hashem grants us a brand new opportunity. He retrofits us with new clarity and imbues our heart with the courage to tackle our newly updated world. You’re like a new creation, and the whole world has been placed fully into your hands.

And just like the profound sense of gratitude that Leah felt when Yehuda was born, before we even roll out of bed, we verbally thank Hashem for kindly rebooting our soul. 

This bud of gratitude is what speaks to the wisdom in our heart, awakening a spiritual hunger, permitting us to serve Hashem with all of our might.

It’s no wonder that Rav Yosef Caro, while following the same structure as the Tur, opens his code of law with the words: “A person should be mighty like a lion to stand up in the morning to serve their creator.” 

You were created for today! You've been imbued with a lionheart. Your perception has been refreshed from the moment that you awoke. You’re positively hungry and super stoked to take on the day. 

Commitment
The path is now cleared before you. Clarity is compared to knowing, but as G.I. Joe always remarked, “Knowing is only half the battle.” You’ve taken heed and your heart is now unfettered, but in order to truly seize the day, you must still take the lead. 

True commitment starts from within the chambers of our heart. In order to realize our greatest potentials, our heart needs thoughtful direction and guidance from the outset. If not, it’ll be left to its own natural devices.

The heart has its beaches, its homeland and thoughts of its own. Wake now, discover that you are the song that the morning brings, but the heart has its seasons, its evenings and songs of its own. - Robert Hunter

The heart is the pivotal place from which we commit to either go down a good path or a bad one. Life is about choices, and making the right choice is what activates and actualizes the wisdom in our hearts. 

The fetter for life's choices is the information that we hold dear: what we value, feel right about and heartfully intuit. You know what’s best for you within the depths of your heart. 

King of the Beasts
The morning is the most opportune time to take command of the day. Taking the lead demands that after sharing our morning gratitude that we immediately don our royal crown. And as we know going into this, being a leader of this capacity, we’re apt to receive a ton of opposition. This requires that we wear our crown wisely. 

Hashem crowned you as the King of the Beasts! 

A wise leader approaches the day by leaning on their right foot, and with their heart pointed in the right direction. When we roar out of bed with the right get-up-and-go, our day is bound to be filled with positive energy. We’re assured to be awe inspired and filled with the motivation necessary to accomplish our daily tasks from the get-go. It’s the lionheart who lives life to the fullest.

As we’ve already established, leaving our heart to its own tricks isn’t the wise way to go. It leads to making mistakes, and with every stumble, we’re prone to increase the emptiness that exists within our heart. It’s this additional shmutz which takes away from our efforts to pursue our goals for the day. 

The Antagonist takes advantage of this oversight, pipes in and makes every effort to take control with every fumble. It does this by encouraging inauthentic thoughts to arise from the empty space in our heart, seizing our mind and corrupting our vision. 

These distorted thoughts are what prompt mishaps and cause mistakes to happen. 

To the untrained eye, our Antagonist's foreign ideas seem incredibly authentic, and due to that, we’re bound to make improper life decisions. And now we’re stuck walking its path and not our own. 

How do you regain control of your heart? 

The Antagonist has wrapped its muddy fingers around our thoughts, and our heart has succumbed to its whims. Odds are, our heart’s become severely jaded in the process. But in line with Yehuda Ben Teima, we’ve already been entrusted with the wherewithal to break ourselves free. And we do this by engaging with our internal wisdom.

Our aim is a shift in perspective.

In order to initiate this process, we must leave our old and corrupted thoughts behind. And that demands a heartfelt moment of mourning for the initial misemployment of the wisdom in our heart. We achieve this by speaking directly to our heart, and having it discuss with Hashem the deep regret that we have for our ill-directed behavior. 

According to the prophet Jeremiah, describing how infuriated and embittered we are with its undoing is what inspires your heart to beseech Hashem: “Their heart cried out to Hashem.”  

The very effort of reaching out to Hashem is what unshackles your heart. It quiets the mind, allowing you to take pause to reflect and redirect. Once relieved from our Antagonist's burden, we may start thinking clearly, and guide our heart to make better choices in life all over again. 

Power of Choice
Rabbi Akiva didn’t get too caught up in the subject of free will. He knew that Hashem watches us closely, and yet at the same time, allows us to choose our own destiny. He was even known to say, “Everything is foreseen, yet the freedom to choose is given.”  

The power to choose is your greatness. Your future lies in your own hands. You govern your actions, and they’re to your credit alone.

When we put into motion our power of choice, our personal story goes into full swing. Taking a stand allows us to live independently. And our ability to choose between good or bad grants us the means to forge and maintain our own path. 

As a leader, you get to choose your own direction, and “who” you’re going to be from this day forward. The power is in our hands to choose to either become lofty or lowly, as Rabbi Yechiel Michel Tucazinsky points out in his book, Bridge of Life:
 
“Man can choose his path between these extremes. He can degrade himself to the lowest of all levels or else raise himself aloft to encompass the entire world. Should he wish, he can become a cruel, venomous beast of prey...He has the capacity to become an angel on high.”  

It’s ultimately a choice between life and death. The wrong decision leaves us with nothing, but the right one permits us to truly come into our own: “This free mastery of himself molds man, and either gives life to himself or else destroys and reduces it to nothing.”  

As we mentioned before, Hashem said, “You should choose life!”  And as Ben Azzai would say, “The reward for doing a mitzvah is a mitzvah.”   We may infer from this that we reap what we sow. The future is in our hands, and Hashem doesn’t place in our hands the bad or the good, but choice alone.

After we’ve chosen the path that's most fitting for us, we reap the benefits. When your first step is in the right direction, you can count on Hashem to join you for the ride. Every good step encourages Hashem to help us to step another.

At the end of the creation narrative, Hashem’s Torah resolutely states, “And Hashem saw all that He had done, and behold it was good.”  Yet, with all of this goodness, it still wasn’t a finished product. There’s still more to do. As we walk in Hashem’s ways, we take lead in completing His project. We add more goodness to the world every step of the way. 

Hashem created a world filled with goodness, but so much has been hidden. It rests only in potential. And it’s our duty to actualize it. 

A big part of growing up is learning to discover and realize our underdeveloped goodness. It’s us who make it good. It’s our job to make good on the good. And as R’ Tucazinsky puts it, it’s upon you to make your own good.  

>> Takeaways <<
	Every morning Hashem provides us with new clarity and gives our heart the courage to tackle your newly updated world.
	Gratitude is what speaks to the wisdom in your heart, awakening a spiritual hunger, permitting you to serve Hashem with all your might.
	The heart is the pivotal place from which you commit to either go down a good path or a bad one.
	The Antagonist encourages inauthentic thoughts to rise from the space in your heart, seizing your mind and corrupting your vision.
	Hashem watches us closely, and yet at the same time, allows us to choose our own destiny
	It’s upon you to make good on the good, or as R’ Tucazinsky puts it, it’s upon you to make your own good. 

________________________________________

 
— Decisions —

Why are decisions so darn difficult to make?

We can attribute our decision-making struggles to a normal case of FOMO. It’s like we’re all prophets when it comes to decision making. Just toying with the idea of making a choice unboxes the sense that once we clop down the gavel, single out an idea, and select one option over another, we’re certain to die of regret. 

That’s because our Antagonist places in our heart the overblown idea that making a decision means we’re automatically excluding all the other options. This is why we often feel like we’re losing out on something really important. All it takes is one decision, and somehow we’ve already missed out. 

And it all happens so quickly. 

Loss of Possibility
Our humanity is struck when confronted with choosing only one style of car, one job, one school, one idea or one person with whom to spend the rest of our life. 

What if you only had one story to tell? How about only one path to walk? 

We all feel constricted when confronted with our own finite-ness. It’s uncomfortable. We become anxious and scared. It feels restrictive. Decisions become weighty. We’ve even felt our breath start to shorten at times. 

Any choice that we make cuts us immediately off from any other possibility. Once we choose one thing, there’s no more other. Every other option has vanished. The potential loss is frighteningly overwhelming. 

We’ve only begun the decision making process, and we’ve already found ourselves mourning the Loss of Possibility. 

Black or White
Life isn’t always so black or white. It’s much greyer than some of us would like to admit. When it comes to life, it’s a lot easier to adopt a more extreme approach. 

Taking our Antagonist’s more reactive, outside-in approach just seems simpler. That way we can at least define ourselves by who or what we think we’re not. It comes with less responsibility. 

Approaching decisions from the inside-out demands more elbow grease. It requires that we already know what we’re packing: our personal strengths and what we truly value. 

In order to make an educated decision in life, we need to begin from a solid sense of self. 

The world-out-there may be fuzzy at times, but in order to make a long-lasting decision, our intentions must be crystal clear. It may not be just black or white yonder, but our decision-making process must certainly be. 

Making a decision requires that we choose one thing over another. And in order to be solid about forging ahead, our attitude must truly be an all or nothing! 

Why do we often balk at making such concrete decisions? 

Maybe it's because we don’t want to view ourselves as children. It’s belittling. A kid’s world is much simpler. All little ones perceive things as black or white. Youngsters do better with boundaries. 

Contrary to the common teenage vibrato, they actually yearn for limits and rules. 

Making a commitment means taking a stance. Putting up boundaries is a bold move.

Yet it all still sounds so inflexible, and people continue to feel guilty about relating to the world as if it’s only black or white. 

It doesn’t help that our Antagonist sweeps in and murmurs, “Don’t limit yourself. Don’t be so married to that idea. Why are you so committed to that job? Life is way too short to be devoted to only one person.” 

The next thing we know, we begin to regret our decision. We hem and haw. Then our imagination kicks in, and laments, “Look at all the possibilities that I could have had. If only I would have chosen the green over the red. Or maybe I should have just decided to wait on it.” 

Does that sound like a solid commitment to you? 

It’s like a person who’s still living in the past. One moment they’re making a choice, and then minutes or days later, they’re grasping and yearning to take back what they believe they’ve lost in the process. 

Do you mourn the loss of grey? 

The regret that seeps in after making a decision only muddies our thoughts. It creates a pain in our heart, our neck, and throws us deep into doubt. We get stuck in its muddy middle. The existential tension that arises leads us to start questioning who we are, and how we define ourselves.

This confusion is due to our failed attempt at making a concrete, long-term, black or white decision. 

Authentic, longstanding decisions are forward thinking. Each choice is made full on. Up to now we’ve been flowing. And I know that swinging the gavel makes it sound final and complete, but the opposite is true. 

Limits put up walls, but they also open doorways. Viewing our decisions as an all or nothing, is the trick to unlocking the gateways to our greatest potentials. 

Educated Decisions
I’m not suggesting that you jump into anything. It’s important to make educated decisions. Nobody should fault a person for doing their own research or getting professional advice. Listening to others share their own experiences can be very enlightening. Many people have gone down the very same path before us. 

It’s good to approach new beginnings in an educated way. It’s impossible to predict what the future holds. A wise person allows themselves a trial period when starting a new career, entering a new relationship, or even when committing to a new diet. 

This is sticky business because our Antagonist will wake up and undoubtedly try to shtup in doubt before we start to fully commit. When it succeeds, we’re likely  to get anxious after two meetings, a week in the new office, or to even cheat on our diet before seeing any real results. 

Do you always stick to your new year's resolutions?

That’s why the trial period also needs to be black or white. And there’s a plus: We get to decide how much time to dedicate to each established period. Making educated decisions lends us the freedom to script the narrative for ourselves. 

We can always stop and reevaluate things once we’ve reached our mark. 

What do decisions have to do with being locked into a negative behavior or thought pattern? 

Decision making can be contraindicated. What about showing favorites? The heroin addict prefers his particular spice over another. The gastronome loves her special delights. We don’t dare to ask, “Why do you limit yourself?” And start to suggest, “If you knew where to look, I’m sure you could find other good drugs to consume as well.” 

There’s always another option.

Wise decisions set up healthy boundaries. They’re like guardrails that provide us with a straight shot as we walk along our own path. Without them, it’s hard to maintain trajectory. 

Blinders
Putting up blinders isn’t the best for every situation, but when it comes to making good on our decisions, it’s a wise way to go.

There’s nothing more enjoyable than having a little clarity in life. Life’s decisions are like that. Wearing ethereal blinders puts other potential options at bay. Although the road is often shadowed by many shades of grey, we still need to cut through the haze. The sharper are our choices, the clearer our path will be. 

Do you have a difficult time sticking to your commitments? 

If so, you haven’t truly committed yourself to carrying out the task. That’s what commitment means. There’s always got to be the follow through. It’s not enough to just pledge our devotion to carrying it out. We must execute it. We’ve got to stick to it.

Stick to It
My father was a big ball player when he was young. Although his last job was in business and budget administration, based on his High School counselor’s advice, he began his teaching career in the Detroit Public Schools as a Physical Education teacher. 

Like most suburban kids in America, we had a basketball net affixed to the roof of the garage. One day my dad grabbed the ball and took me outside to the driveway. He said, “Son! Today, I’m going to teach you about the world.”

This was sort of a play on words because the game we proceeded to play was called, Around the World. 

He directed me to stand underneath the basket, and although he hadn’t played in decades, to my surprise he made every shot - nothing but net.

As he proceeded to travel the driveway and describe the world, he bent his knees, held the ball between his eyes, and shot with his arm fully extended. The ball seemed to drop effortlessly by his self-professed perfect form. 

Every time he stepped into position he illuminated the three components necessary to succeed in this world. With every shot he reported, “Number one, be persistent. Number two, be consistent. And number three, be sure to always follow through.” 

He put an extra emphasis on the follow through. He coached, “Always make sure to watch your hand go into the basket.” As the ball soared through the air, he arched his hand, visualizing its descent into the basket, and in with a swish went every ball.

Sticking to commitments doesn’t mean that we can’t ever change our mind. We just have to first put it into motion. There's no better way to find out if it was a good decision or not. We can always reevaluate and switch to a different path at a later date.

It takes experience to make wise decisions. Through trial and error we get the knack of it, and with a proper amount of persistence and consistency, we may become a model for what it means to carry things through—to do good on our life’s choices. 

Every decision must be aired with an all or nothing attitude. And when we stumble and fall along the way, it’s this particular attitude that makes it much easier to get up, brush ourselves off, and recommit to carrying out our decided task. 

Each time we stumble and pull ourselves up by our own britches it builds confidence. Every fall holds the potential for a new beginning. It’s an opportunity to re-gather yourself, take aim and walk your path as the person who you’ve been striving to be.

>> Takeaways <<
	One decision and you’re already mourning the Loss of Possibility. 
	Life is often fuzzy and grey, but clear decisions start off with an all or nothing attitude. 
	Limits put up walls, but they also open doorways. 
	Educated decisions set up healthy boundaries, acting like guardrails that help you to maintain trajectory as you’re walking down your own path.
	Not sticking to our commitments means that we didn’t truly commit to carrying out the task in the first place.
	A wise person sticks to one’s path by being persistent, consistent, and by visualizing themselves on the follow through. 

________________________________________

 
— Bold as a Leopard —

Stiff-Necked
The leopardlike personality is a force to be reckoned with. They’re wily. They’re known to be “high energy.” They’re troublemakers. When they run amuck, they tear their prey down. When they attack, they suppress. They leave others feeling caught in a pickle. 

The way to handle this pickley stiff-necked person is to match their toughness, to also be as hard as metal. The Maharal shares a Midrash that paints both the Babylonians and the Greeks as being brazenly unrefined rocklike personalities. 

	It describes the Babylonians bedecked in armor decked in silver and gold, and the Greeks ironclad in iron. The Midrash illustrates Nebuchadnezzar, the once king of Babylonia as bearing a coat of copper. This tends to bother the Maharal because the prophet Daniel didn’t witness a leopardlike creature until the third beast surfaced from the ocean deep.  
	The Greeks are often compared to Daniel’s third leopardlike beast. But peering into his vision we do see him describing the brass of Babylonia as having their: “belly and thighs made of copper.” 

The Maharal admits that the leopard is undoubtedly as brazen as copper, and to help the idea along, the beast was also sporting something even more bold and audacious. Daniel’s lionlike, yet human-like, creature was fitted with “wings of an eagle.”  

It takes a winged shameless beast to fly to every corner of the earth with full intention to conquer it. 

Too Bashful 
A non-brazen person seeks relaxation and contentment.  

Humble, modest, or timid people can too easily become complacent. Often, they just don’t have enough gumption to spring into action. They’re not the first to jump at an idea, run after an opportunity, or join in on a worldwide movement. 

Brazen people are on fire! They’re compared to aish, and fire is always ablaze. It doesn’t settle. It’s not interested in sitting to chill. It’s always on the move, stays eager and is fully adrenalized.

It’s pumped, winged and well armored. 

According to the Midrash, Alexander the Great also spread his four wings asunder. This brazen king of the Greeks would not sleep a wink until the entire world was suppressed under his wings. 

Like a bird shooting in every direction, he wouldn’t relent until all his brashness was exhausted. Greece saw itself as everything (the only thing). It sought to trample everything else in its path. How could they allow anything else to exist? 

The Maharal compares this characteristic to the last and nastiest creature that Daniel envisioned. It was caught gnashing its fierce ironclad teeth from the start. Nothing is safe from its iron jaws. The Greeks pulverized everything with their steel. They treated everyone as a pariah. They preyed on the poor. They clung grossly to anything inconsistent and lacking. In the end, no rickety wall or faulty foundation was left standing.

Stouthearted
Yehuda Ben Teima taught us to be mighty, powerful, and leopardlike. This hardwearing personality trait can be used for the good or for the bad. You can motivate it either to go against your grain, or to hold yourself tight to your path. When you’re bold as a leopard, nothing can deter you from staying true to yourself. 

How can we be sure to do the wise thing?

According to the Tur, Yehuda Ben Teima demands that we be unabashed in the face of our Antagonist’s opposition. He doesn't expect us to attack our Antagonist head-on, but believes that we’re wise enough to stay one step ahead of its game. You can avoid it altogether.

We just have to arouse the wisdom that’s hardwired in our heart. When confronted by a hostile environment, we can maintain trajectory by tapping into and leveraging our cardiac output. And you do so by speaking to your heart. 

Yehuda Ben Teima trusts that we know in our heart of hearts what’s truly in our best interests. When we get a sense that we’re under fire, speaking to our heart will trigger a natural repulsion to the smell of the smoke screen that our Antagonist has blown in our direction. 

It lends our heart enough pause to set up a proper roadblock, guarding us from stepping away from the path that continues before us. 

As a wise person, we must be able to keep your wits about ourselves even in the face of opposition. This level of equanimity requires that we always have our whereabouts in check.

Are you able to imagine drawing a line between yourself and your Antagonist?

If you’re struggling at this, there’s still a way to cleverly employ the resources hidden in the chambers of your heart. Like we said, in line with King David, the path towards becoming a wise person is a clever one. 

The way to become wise in a clever way is by educating our heart.

Every time we’ve managed to get unstuck, regain our balance, and find solid ground, we’ve been allotted an amazing opportunity. Not to just learn more about our Antagonist’s nefarious ways, but to also refine our power of distinction. This power allows us to gain more clarity about what paths are good for us and which ones are sorely not. 

Every time we succeed at climbing out of the quagmire, it creates a certain degree of muscle memory. Whether we’re fully aware of it or not, we’ve been educating our heart all along about the perils that we face at the hands of our Antagonist. Now we’re aware of this.

Once our enlightened heart has become wiser to our Antagonist’s tomfoolery, we’re given direct access to this learned cardiac wisdom. 

It takes a lot of grit to turn our eyes away from our Antagonist’s influence. But once we do, we’re free to move forward. We become unshakable, unstoppable, and unapologetic. This stouthearted attitude is enough to remind our heart to tap into its natural resources. It palpitates, awakens itself to the danger, and unleashes its natural repulsion to your Antagonist’s false-hearted demands. 

Hardwired for It
In other words, Yehuda Ben Teima entrusts us with the duty to show great chutzpah in the face of adversity. In times of necessity, it shouldn't be difficult to muster up boldness and brazenness for it’s a part of the very fabric of our being. 

The huge mishap of the golden calf gives testimony to this. We actually created a new entity in opposition to Hashem. And this stubborn attribute continues to rifle through our veins. We have a knack for it!

Reish Lakish indicates that three traits of brazenness were gifted to Israel. They are the very tools that allow us to guard, maintain, and regain control over ourselves. It’s like we’re on fire. It takes a stubborn, stiff-necked, and obstinate personality to block out our Antagonist’s radically imposing agenda. 

This bullheaded personality is indispensable. It’s what makes us unyielding to our Antagonist’s whims, keeps us right on track and still on the go. Like a four-winged creature, your Antagonist yearns to take away your freedom. 

The more unshakable we are in the face of persecution; the sharper are our efforts towards living more wisely. 

Pursuit of Wisdom
You’re built to be wise. As a carrier of this leopardlike trait, we’ve been designed to develop a keen mindful discernment, and to be able to enact good judgment. We must be shrewd in order to acquire wisdom. It also helps to carry an unapologetic attitude. 

Warning: When we doubt ourselves or fear the expectations of others, we’re withheld from this ability. 

The bombastic words of a brazen person are cancerous to some, but with proper intention, they may also be used to arouse, excite, motivate, inspire and inflame oneself to learn and to pursue wisdom.

How did Hillel become such a big scholar? He listened to his own wise words: “A bashful person can’t learn!”  

R’ Meir once asked rhetorically, “Why was the Torah given to Israel?” He answered wittily, “Because they’re absolutely brazen.”  

How else could we receive Hashem’s Torah? The light of His Torah is known to set things ablaze. Just before Moshe died he recounted the fiery Torah given as a blessing to the children of Israel, saying, "The Lord came from Sinai and shone forth from Seir to them; He appeared from Mount Paran and came with some of the holy myriads; from His right hand was a fiery law for them.”  

R’ Ishmael’s son describes Hashem’s Torah like a blazing inferno. To properly receive it, we have to match it. We must also be on fire.

>> Takeaways <<
	The way to handle a stiff-necked person is to match their toughness.
	Brazen people are on fire! They don’t settle.
	When you arouse your wise cardiac output by speaking to your heart, it sets up a proper roadblock, guarding you from stepping away from the path that continues before you. 
	Climbing out of the quagmire creates a certain degree of muscle memory, educating your heart about the perils that you face at the hands of your Antagonist. 
	It takes a stubborn, stiff-necked, and obstinate personality to block out your Antagonist’s radically imposing agenda.
	The words of a brazen person are often carcinogenic, but with proper intention, they may be used to arouse, excite, motivate, inspire and inflame yourself to learn and to pursue wisdom.

________________________________________


 
— By Invitation Only —

One day my dad and I went for a walk, and we passed a private lawn that had a sign bearing the words, Keep off the Grass. He looked at me with wise eyes, and challenged, “Son! Do you know the reason why they put up that sign?” “Ah...so people won’t walk on the grass and destroy it,” I sheepishly replied. “No. Because somebody once walked on their grass,” he resolved in a sage like tone.

The Invite
“Hashem canvassed Cain, ‘Why are you bothered? Why are you looking so down? If you do what’s good, won’t it raise your outlook? But if you don’t do what’s good, wrongdoing crouches at the door; and it desires you—but you should master it’.”  

Rava maintains that our Antagonist first appears at our doorway as a wayfarer. It then cleverly masks itself as a guest, and on the third visit, it somehow manages to transform itself into the master of our house.  

How the heck does it get into your home in the first place? 

We invite it in. It only gains leverage over us if we open the door and wave it in. Maybe it would be prudent to hang a shingle on the door that reads, Antagonists Keep Out! 

When we find ourselves in conflict with our Antagonist, and that old negative behavior or thought pattern starts knocking us about—it’s because we invited it in. 

It’s like we decided that our Antagonist deserves a more prominent role in our life than we do. And worse, we’ve really taken it to heart. 

Inviting our Antagonist into our heart is tantamount to setting it a place at our dinner table. Surprise! Now we look over and it’s sitting in our living room. The next thing we know, we’re rubbing arms with it on the couch. 

This should start to make us feel a bit uncomfortable. And that’s a good thing. When we don’t enjoy it’s presence, next time we might think not to invite it in. 

Invite it in? Do you remember hearing the knock at the door? Do you remember unlatching the door and letting it in? How about providing it a vacancy in one of the chambers of your heart? 

Most people don’t. Not letting it in takes practice. Through trial and error we become wiser to it, but in order to do that, we must first become more clever about how we perceive it. 

The more times we knock heads with it, the more attuned we become to our Antagonist’s antics. The moment we start to dislike how it imposes itself on us and our life, we may be inspired to take action. We embrace the raw character needed to manage it. Developing a wise attitude towards it demands a certain degree of grit. When it comes back soliciting, the wise person in us looks to the doorway in our mind and trumpets, “Go away! I’m tired of letting you in.” 

Let it Be
Hashem told Cain that if we use something meant for the good in a bad way, our misdeed will follow us home. It perches itself next to our door, obsesses over us, and loiters there until we’ve gained control over it. 

Rav Hirsch finds fault with the misconception which has befallen us based on a misunderstanding of the words: your wrongdoing crouches at the door. He’s perturbed by the fact that the word crouch, or rovetz in Hebrew, has been described as an Antagonist who sits in waiting ready to pounce. 

He considers the vision of a wicked wild beast that’s just lurking, waiting to overpower us and drag us into its lair, to be too immature of an outlook. That’s because when probing the usage of the language of rovetz in relationship to animals located in other places of Hashem’s Torah, the very opposite appears to ring true. 

Rav Hirsch claims that there isn’t one single instance where an animal that’s crouching is considered to be lurking in waiting. On the contrary, the beast always appears to be unconcerned and is peacefully resting. 

In line with this, our Antagonist may perch itself at our door, but it has no intention to hassle, torment, or assault us in any way. It’s too busy napping.

But it’s clearly not in hibernation. We’re told that it desires you. You’ve stumbled, whet its appetite, and now it craves to be with you—it’s hungry for you. Rav Hirsch suggests that when we look to see how Hashem treats the language of teshuka in other parts of His Torah, it depicts a kind of devotion or longing for love. 

King Solomon’s famous words are a keen example. When speaking to his greatest love, he sang endearingly, "I’m my beloved's, and his desire [teshukaso] is for me.”  

And looking back at the first documented human relationship, Rav Hirsch paints the picture of a loving wife who finds the completion of herself in her devotion to her husband: “And to your husband will be your desire [teshukaseich], and he will rule over you."   

That’s why it’s so difficult to shake our Antagonist. It’s completely devoted to us, it’s enamored by us, and longs to be fulfilled by us. It’s head over heels in love with us. It’s in everyone’s best interests to allow it to serve us. 

However tumultuous of a relationship it may be, we’re practically married to it. When we’re not fulfilling our spousal role, our Antagonist turns the tide and judges us unfavorably. It reacts by holding its love back from us. It pokes us, pulls our chain and tries to convince us to become the person who it wants us to be. When we find ourselves experiencing this degree of gevurah, it’s a surefire way to know that we’ve appointed our Antagonist as master over us.

Counterattack
What happens when our greatest concerns takes over? What occurs when our self-doubt, anxiousness, obsessions, and our blindness start to flow inward.  Our power of preservation awakens. And now we’re poised and ready for the counterattack. 

This means, we’re stuck in a reactive mode.

Among all this commotion we’ve lost our whereabouts. We feel vulnerable. We’re caught in a fight or flight. Would you want to fight? If so, who will be doing the attacking, and who’s going to be attacked? 

It’s all on us, that’s who! And there’s no real love in self-harm. 

All our Antagonist wants is for us to rule over it, to control it. Like Cain, Hashem trusts that we’re able to turn this bad situation into a good one. But until we’re ready to just leave it snoozing at our doorway, we’re more apt to invite its influence into our life. Rav Hirsch indicates that our Antagonist longs for us to “regulate it, rule over it, and direct it.” 

That’s its calling in life. 

He clarifies this, stating, “By you mastering and guiding it, it achieves its purpose, and that’s why it longs to achieve it. For there is not a single natural tendency in Humanity which is, in itself, either good or bad.” 

It too wants to achieve its purpose in life. 

It Ain't All bad
Rabbi Chaim Friedlander shares an extraordinary idea in his book Living Pathways in Education. Other Jewish sources are known to say the following: From the time of birth, our bad nature rules over our good one.  Throughout our childhood, our animal like senses take charge, leveraging all of our thoughts and behaviors. When we develop into young adulthood, our good nature begins to blossom, and eventually, comes into full play.  As we mature, over time, with the help of our good side, we’re able to rule over the animal that lives within. 

Rabbi Friedlander squelches this two tiered approach by asking a number of poignant questions: If we were born solely and completely bad, how could we ever be held accountable for any of our bad actions? Anything we think or do is just going to be bad. Furthermore, how could anyone expect us to do something that’s good? Being all bad from where would we have learned to be good? And what would even inspire us to try?

When annoyed, people often say the following about active kids: “That child is pure yetzer hora [bad nature],” and “He’s just a vilde chaya [wild animal].” 

And that just seems to explain everything for them. 

People don’t see much harm in having this attitude because they say in their hearts, “In the future when the child matures, they’ll receive their yetzer tov [good nature].” And that, too, somehow solves everything. 

Everything's good after that.

Rabbi Friedlander stresses that being born with an active bad nature is likened to being born in sin. Were you born all-wrong? He asks, “If you’re a born sinner, how could you ever do any good?” 

If we’re pure badness—really bad to the bone—how could anyone teach us to do anything good? 

Rabbi Friedlander doesn’t leave us hanging. He reveals for us the story of what really happens at birth. He states that people are born with both good and bad natures. Neither is more dominant than the other. As a matter of fact, he implies that they both begin in a state of rest. They’re not awake yet. They’re not at all animated, and that’s because they’re made out of what he calls, chomer-golem. This is best translated as original, raw materials or what we, colloquially, refer to as inanimate matter. 

Inanimate matter is untapped, closed off potential. It lacks depth and influence. It’s simply not going anywhere. 

In line with this, when a child is behaving poorly, we may all agree that they’re acting like an animal. But they’re not doing anything wrong! It’s not a sinful act. They may be living a raw and solely physical existence, but their behavior has nothing to do with having an actively bad nature. 

It’s too busy snoozing.

It’s inevitable (as we all know), eventually the badness is going to wake up. Rabbi Friedlander suggests that by ages 8 to 10 to begin educating children about goodness. As children of prophets, we’re able to predict that their good and bad natures will both play a big factor in their lives. It’s wise to beat it to the punch, and take prophylactic measures by teaching them early on how to use the good while leaving the bad behind. 

A little kick in the pants: This infers that we, ourselves, already have to be on that level by the time our child turns 8! Kids don’t miss a beat. They’re hyper observant.

As a reminder, the only reason why our Antagonist awakens from its static, raw and inanimate position is because we water it, feed it, nurture it—empower it. You wake it up!

Let it stay asleep. 

Sartling it may even be considered gezel sheina (lit. stealing sleep). The sages compare this act to causing someone personal pain or injury. Awakening a sleeping bear in general doesn’t sound very wise. It may be enamored by you, but waking it up is just asking for trouble.

>> Takeaways <<
	When you use something meant for the good in a bad way, your misdeed will follow you home, and if you’re not wise, you might just invite it in.
	This wicked beast may appear to be lurking, but it’s truly unconcerned and is peacefully resting. 
	Your Antagonist actually desires you, seeks to be loved and fulfilled by you, and wants to be mastered by you.
	By ages 8 to 10 it’s important to begin teaching children about goodness, and that’s because eventually the badness is going to wake up. 
	It’s wise to beat it to the punch, and take preventative measures by teaching them early on how to use the good while leaving the bad behind.
	The only reason why your Antagonist awakens from its static, raw and inanimate position is because you wake it up!

________________________________________

 
— Quick as a Deer —

Whether it’s your heart or your mind that awakens you to action, it’s certainly your legs that propel you towards your destination. According to the Tur, Yehuda Ben Teima was hinting to us in the end of his Mishnah, that being quick and light as a deer refers specifically to our legs. 

He adds that our legs are vehicles for doing goodness in this world. And thanks to King David, we learn that it’s possible to leave the bad in the dust by running towards it. Whether we intend to do an act of kindness, or even something less praiseworthy, our legs carry a full guarantee. They’re eager to fulfill to whatever it is that we’re aspiring, as R’ Yochanan says, “A person's feet are their guarantors; to where one is summoned, there they are led.”  

The path in which we wish to take, there we shall be led. Our legs vow to accompany us on the way, as Hillel reports, “To the place that I love, there my feet lead me.” A person’s feet lead them to wherever their heart desires.  

Let Your Legs Do the Walking
One quick look at our bodies, and we can see that our feet are the furthest distance from our minds. When stuck in a rut, leveraging our power of distinction is no longer an option. That’s because in order to get ourselves moving, our thoughts must first be channeled through the heart. And let’s face it, if we’re currently in a sticky situation, it means that both our heart and ability to make proper decisions have already been compromised.

We’re steeped in the muddy middle. It’s stressful, and we’re finally getting fed up with being stuck in our Antagonist’s trap. We’re inspired to seek a way out.  What’s our first step? How do we remove ourselves from its clutches? How do we begin to stride forward? 

In line with King David, speaking to our legs is our only way to jumpstart our heart. And like the story of the famous dogooder and great Inspector Gadget, we may lean over and cleverly command our feet, “Go Go Gadget Legs!” Once our body’s mobile, and our blood starts to pump, our heart is free to do the right thing.

As the Sefer HaChinuch purports, “Hearts are drawn after actions.”  Once our legs are mobile, the wisdom in our heart resuscitates, and we feel fully alive. Thanks to your legs, you’re able to guide your heart right back on track.

>> Takeaways <<
	Your heart or your mind may awaken you to action, but it’s your legs that propel you towards your destination.
	Running towards goodness leaves the bad in the dust. 
	The path in which you wish to take, your legs vow to take you there
	When stuck in your Antagonist’s trap, speaking to your legs is your only way to jumpstart your heart. 
	Once our body’s moving, the wisdom in our heart resuscitates, and then our legs guide us back on track.

________________________________________

 
 — Do, Then Listen —

Feet First 
Rabban Gamliel’s son, Shimon, would say: I’ve grown up among the sages, and I haven’t found anything better for the body other than silence. Study isn't the essential, but action is key.  
 
The emphasis that King David places on his legs indicates that for him actions speak louder than words. When we’re feeling anxious, ignoble or especially paralyzed, it’s difficult to regain composure. Our Antagonist has seized our mind, and any attempt to verbalize our intent is bound to go awry. 

Before we think to pierce our lips, it’s best to first take a moment of silence. To take a second just to quiet our minds.

All of a sudden, our Antagonist will be tricked into thinking that we’re someone else. Our silence pulls the wool over its eyes. Its antennas are thrown off, and it’s tricked into reading us as a wise person. King Solomon strengthens this clever idea, revealing, “Even a fool will be thought to be wise if they’re silent; when they seal their lips [they’ll be considered] understanding.”  

But if we do foolishly open our lips, we’re most likely to let it all hang out. We be begin to overflow with negativity. And we start mimicking the critical and defeatist messages that our Antagonist often delivers, recounting its story and not our own. 

It’s better to remain silent and be thought a fool than to open one’s mouth and remove all doubt — Abraham Lincoln

A word to the wise: airing our thoughts may even be hazardous to our health. They have the power to unlock our internal gates to the Antagonist itself. Once our heart is open, it’s free to come in, sniff around and make itself at home. It listens to our tone. It hears us hinting: “Don’t worry. I’m still with you. You’re still the one calling the shots.” 

There are times when silence trumps transparency. 

When our Antagonist becomes too much to bear, it’s helpful to remove ourselves from view. Once it can’t find us, we may quiet our mind. We may slow down our breathing, and place all of our thinking aside. 

Once we’ve accomplished that, we regain the ability to reset our compass. Then we may start off walking in our desired direction. As we walk to our new destination, we may now safely revise, rescript and verbalize our narrative in a more positive light.

Shake a Leg
When stuck in the muddy middle, it behooves us to button up, form a stiff upper lip, and let our legs do all the talking. Once we shake a leg, we’re instantly unstuck, and we’re free again to talk our walk. 

This was one of the revelations we experienced at Mt. Sinai. We were so thirsty for Hashem’s Torah that we were willing to embrace it all. We didn’t even give it a second thought. We jumped at the opportunity, saying, “Na'aseh v'nishma.”  

This Do, Then Listen approach to life can be scary. It requires a sink or swim attitude. This school of thought happens to be a common business model. After boldly jumping into a position, only then do we start to learn the ropes. 

We pick up the basics afterwards. This is how many people have jump started their careers. You may be thinking that jumping in feet first is what got us into this sticky mess in the first place. I’m simply proposing that we leverage the same businesslike skill to spring ourselves back into action. 

Leaping forward is the most courageous way to get our legs moving, and to free ourselves from our Antagonist's grip. When feeling paralyzed and stuck in a seemingly never-ending negative pattern, it’s often necessary to take such an extreme leap of faith.

While living in the olam ha ma'aseh—the world of action—we sometimes find this clever business model to be our only recourse. It’s what permits us to take leaps and bounds. It lifts us off the ground, shifts our vantage point, and affords us a new perspective. 

Once on the move, we may show the world that we really mean business. 

We can be a model for what it means to be lionhearted in the face of adversity. With our legs in full swing, we may talk our walk. It’s this step forward that lends us the ability to teach others the ropes. Although it’s scary not knowing what may lie ahead, shaking a leg places us in a good position to show others how to leap beyond the face of the unknown. 
 
Fear of the Unknown
Unlike Hashem, we don’t know what the future holds. Acting without thinking may sound highly irresponsible, but at times, it’s the only practical solution. New waters must be breached, and that may require taking a significant leap. 

I’m not suggesting to act blindly. And if you do decide to jump, you’re certainly not alone. It wouldn’t be the first time in history that someone willingly vaulted over the iron wall of the unknown. 

Not every leap forward leads to instant success. We need to be realistic about how we set our goals. It’s the small actions that help us to move forward in life. In reality, leaping into the future may seem like a huge endeavor, but in reality, we’re only just inching forward. Moving a hairsbreadth ahead is really our aim. 

There’s purpose to attacking life with leaps and bounds. It’s not only a clever way to get unstuck, but it also manages to launch our true selves into the future. Any attempt to hurl yourself out from the muddy middle deserves to be celebrated.

Overcoming the fear of the unknown is a big part of our legacy. With one fell swoop Israel announced that we’d Do, Then Listen. We let our legs do the talking. We leaped to the task at hand, broadcasting a willingness to both deliver what Hashem was stipulating for us in the moment, and to also listen to whatever He might ask from us in the future.

Get a Jump On
Yehuda Ben Teima believes that before we head out on our journey, it’s wise to be prepared from the start. A wise person keeps a keen eye on the path ahead. They plan for any potential problems that may arise in the future. Like Yehuda Ben Teima suggests, while soaring above, we may see what lies ahead with a bird’s-eye-view. 

Life can often be quite unpredictable. It’s hard to know what might be waiting for us around the bend. 

Getting an early jump on things permits us to avoid getting caught in our Antagonist’s trap, altogether. Rabbi Moshe Chaim Luzzatto (1707–1746) the author of the Mesillas Yesharim, reflects this idea early on in his sixth chapter. Like Yehuda Ben Teima, he proposes that it’s wise not to give our Antagonist take the reins, and that requires not allowing it to get muddled up in our actions from the get-go. 

If we give it an inch, it takes a mile. It just weighs us down. As the Mesillas Yesharim explains, we sense the burden even more because our nature is already extremely heavy. We’re made from earth and water, and these are very weighty materials. 

No wonder it’s so difficult to get ourselves up and running in the morning! It’s hard to take on new challenges when our own physicality is weighing us down. 

In order to leap forward we have to go against our own nature. Continuing to play a heavy hand won’t lead us to success. But with the right amount of enthusiasm, we can give ourselves the lift necessary to get a jump on life. 

According to Rabbi Luzzatto, we may uplift our feet by doing good deeds. Doing acts of kindness permits us to rise above our material nature. This in turn, affords us with an amazing amount of chizuk. Acts of kindness empower us, giving us just the boost needed to progress forward.  

When we’re not sure of what lies ahead, we may tap into the endless pool of emotional wisdom and spiritual encouragement that’s already been allotted to us. And we’re not expected to do this all on our own. We’re invited to step ourselves into Yehoshua Bin Nun’s wet sandals, and imagine what it’d be like to receive chizuk directly from Hashem: “Did I not instruct you to be strong and to have courage, and to not fear and be dismayed, for Hashem is with you wherever you go.”  

Shpilkes 
“I was quick, and I did not delay to keep your commandments.”  

A good dose of shpilkes helps a person continue forward.  Impatience may not be the most flattering personality trait, but there’s a benefit to having a few ants in the pants. We tend not to dillydally while walking on pins and needles.

It’s important to do whatever it takes to keep on moving on. I’m not suggesting a fast paced all in the rat race style of movement. It's much better for a person to sustain a low level of shpilkes. It’s good to keep our agitation on a low burner. As we indicated before, we’re never really stagnant. We’re always in a state of transition. We’re either moving forward or slipping back. It’s in our best interests to always be moving towards greater spiritual heights.

When do we finally get to stop moving? 

In short, when we’re buried in the ground. Now is not the time to stop. Stagnation kills. And everyone who’s had a bout with paralysis knows exactly what I mean. It’s not fun feeling forever stuck in the muddy middle.

The old school way of pulling ourselves out of a rut, according to Akavia ben Mahalalel, is to have our minds enter into a conversation with our soul. Our sages would enlist their spiritual side to give their body an essential boost by recalling, 
“Know from where you came, where you’re going, and before whom you’re destined to give a judgment and accounting. From where did you come? — from a putrid drop; Where are you going? — to a place of dust, maggots and worms; and Before whom are you destined to give a judgment and accounting? — before the King of Kings, the Holy One, Blessed is He.” 

If that doesn’t give you shpilkes... 

A person who’s no longer living has obtained whatever spiritual level that they may reach in this world. The Talmud teaches that we bless the living, to go in shalom, as a person moves towards greater spiritual heights. That’s because we care about the process, and they should find peace along the path that they’re walking. 

We bless the departed, to go to shalom, while recounting the amount of spiritual achievement they’ve earned in their physical life. That way we may place the focus on their final destination. And we hope that the address to which they arrive will be a peaceful one.  

Our physical existence is what allows us to transform and perfect ourselves. We do this through our achievements, and by always making sure to stay on the move. Death and stagnation are big downers. It’s no surprise that those who are stuck deep in the muddy middle tend to lose vitality. They’re stuck lamenting the loss of life. 

The sages maintain that focusing on death has the power to jumpstart our heart. They believe that mourning the loss of our worldly opportunity to stride forward, should be enough to do the trick. If this works for you, great! In the next chapter, with a simple twist in perspective, I begin to advocate a much more peaceful, self-empowering and uplifting solution.

>> Takeaways << 
	Actions speak louder than words.
	When feeling stuck in a seemingly never-ending negative pattern, you may jump yourself into a new position, and by shifting your vantage point,afford yourself a new perspective.
	Overcoming the fear of the unknown is a part of your legacy.
	Doing acts of kindness helps us rise above our own nature, giving us just the boost we need to progress forward.
	Maintaining a low level of shpilkes, impatience, helps us to continue striding ahead.
________________________________________

 
— Run Away — 

Run away from your problems! 

At the risk of getting myself in hot water, I humor myself for being the first therapist to tell people that in order to move ahead, you actually have to run away from your problems! 

It’s clever advice too, and I know this because that’s what King David suggests to do. In order to seek shalom in life, he says we must first, “Remove yourself from bad.” 

And just by taking a cursory look at his life, what do you imagine King David did every time he found himself in a sticky situation? He ran away. 

In order to avoid getting further entangled into his problems, he would run as far away from them as he possibly could:

In David’s younger years, King Saul sought to put him to death. Johathon thought he could talk him out of it. In the meantime, he encouraged David to run and hide, warning, “Saul, my father, seeks to put you to death, and now, beware now in the morning, and you shall remain in secret, and hide.” 

While David was playing music, a terrible idea fell upon Saul, and he lunged at David with a spear. But as it says,“[David] slipped away from before Saul, and Saul drove the spear into the wall, but David fled and escaped that night.” 

Saul sent messengers to watch over him, and to put him to death in the morning, “And Michal his wife told David, saying, ‘If you don’t flee for your life tonight, tomorrow you’ll be put to death!’”  He crawled out the window, “And went, and fled, and escaped.” 

After Saul found falt with Michal for letting David escape, we’re told yet again, “Now David had fled and escaped, and he came to Samuel…” 

After Ahimelech the Kohen gave David some sacred bread and Goliath’s sword, David fled to Adullum. 

The people of Keila said they’d give David into Saul’s hands. David escaped again. 

Knowing that his fate was in the hands of Saul, he decided it best to disconnect from him by seeking refuge in the land of the Philistines: “And David arose. And he and the six hundred men who were with him, crossed over to Achish...” 

When Avshalom declared his rebellion, David said to his servants, “Arise and let us flee; for there will be no escape from us before Avshalom. Go quickly lest he hurry and overtake us, and bring evil upon us, and smite the city by the blade of the sword.” 

When we stick around, our Antagonist joins us in the struggle. It puts on the pressure . All the while, it sings Macbeth’s witches song: “Double, double toil and trouble; Fire burn and caldron bubble.” 

And like the famous response of Harry S. Truman: “If you can’t stand the heat, get out of the kitchen!” This is precisely what King David is asking us to do. He wants us to take his lead, and to quickly go find ourselves in a more secure place.

Splitting the scene is usually all that’s needed, but by now we know that our Antagonist has been watching all of our moves. In order to keep on moving on, we have to gather a few more tricks under our belts in order to avoid its convincing rhetoric. 

When stuck in the muddy middle, the trick is not only to run away; it’s also important to know exactly where you’re headed. 

Danger Zone
Leaving our bad situation in haste may be the best move to get out of our Antagonist’s clutches, but if we haven’t already decided on our new destination, we’re most likely to jump feet first into the danger zone. 

However unhealthy are the Antagonist’s whims, we’ve grown used to its rules and expectations. At some point, we adopted its negative messages and ideas as if they were our very own. Now that they’re deeply ingrained in us, they’ve become a part of our basic framework. They now act as our beacon, and they’ve become our modus operandi. 

They become our normal. 

In other words, embracing the external leaves us stuck living under foreign rules, living by an imposed fixed world order. This outside-in approach earns us a very sticky, reliable, and secure position in our Antagonist’s domain. 

Running away isn’t always a sure thing on its own. You should be forewarned: The moment that we step out of our Antagonist’s enforced structure, we’re placing ourselves in jeopardy. In truth, removing ourselves from any ordered environment puts us straight into a world cloaked in chaos. 

Without any plan, we’re bound to step right into the void. 

We witnessed the impact of this chaos being played out in full force at the onset of the establishment of the new Lithuanian-style yeshiva’s in Europe. Before the yeshiva boom, and Reb Chaim’s opening of the doors to the Volozhin Yeshiva (in the early 1800’s), there were only a few hundred talmudic students learning. They were scattered in private study halls throughout Europe. 

The floodgate of students flowing into the yeshivas was a sign of great spiritual energy and influence that was pouring down onto the world from above. Although the halls were now rumbling with excitement, this spiritual mental spike that shot off Jewish learning, was also received by others in a very different and negative way. 

It was also the juice that inspired the development of the haskalah movement. 

This movement not only reignited Hebrew for secular purposes, but they worked hard to establish a cultural and moral renewal devoid of Hashem’s Torah. They also pioneered the modern printing press which enabled them to develop and promulgate a slew of Jewish literature. 

The world was rampant with spiritual energy, and during the transition from one learning framework to the other, many Jews were lost to the Enlightenment Movement. 

Why is this all so interesting? 

As long as you’re plugged into a working framework, it’srelatively easy to stay strong. It’s the transitional space between A to B that’s proven itself to be quite a precarious. 

Once we’ve left our current situation, we eventually merit to find solid ground, but unless we’ve established our next destination from the start, we’re most likely to leap straight into the danger zone.

Before we head out on our journey, it’s worth our time and effort to decide where we’d like to direct our spiritual creative energy. It may demand life experience, but like King David, it’s always in your best interests to know where you’d like to arrive from the get-go. 

Eyes on the Prize
“But their desire is in Hashem's Torah...And whatever they do will succeed.”  

King David’s solution to this problem is clear. He indicates that Hashem’s Torah is our address, and as long as we keep it at the forefront of our mind, we’ll continue to walk the straight path, and our legs will be compelled to move us in the right direction. 

And if we happen to stumble, we can get back on track by reminding ourselves of what’s important, meaningful and valuable in our life. This isn’t new. We’ve been inspired before. We’ve all run after something that we considered important at one point or another. 

It could very well have been something good and kind that we did for somebody else. We know that works. And this is because we’re interested in looking out for their best interests as well. 

If you’re just starting off, you should heed the following warning: Anything we set our sights on will work. It’ll take our mind off our situation, and permit us to take on new strides. Earthly pleasures also briefly shift us out of our Antagonist’s focus, but they simply aren’t good enough for the long run. 

Not everything is as sticky as Hashem’s Torah. 

But doing kind deeds is nothing to shake a stick at. They help hold our world together. As one of the last surviving members of the Great assembly, Shimon the Upright would say, “The world stands upon three things—upon Torah, upon divine service, and upon acts of kindness.”  

Doing whatever’s in our power to get our legs moving upholds this last pillar. Yehuda Ben Teima’s deer is built for doing acts of kindness. Doing something positive for another person is the quickest route to reignite the wisdom in our heart. Once it’s awakened, our eyes may be better focused on the prize. 

Remember King David’s theorem?

He’d first focus on his legs, then his heart, and then his eyes. He knew that we, too, would see success by following the same clever design. Hashem's mitzvos keep us on trajectory, and once our legs are up and running, as King David divulges, “The statues [pathways] of Hashem are uplifting, gladdening the heart—Hashem’s commands are clear, enlightening the eyes.”  

When we’re walking the straight and narrow, the flames in our heart burn stronger. We see things much more clearly, and this helps to keep our eyes directly on the prize. And we get help from above along the way.

In a tight spot? Just shake a leg! And Hashem will fan the warmth in your heart, sit shotgun and tag along with you for the ride.

We learn this from Yaakov Avinu who raised up his feet to travel to the east.  It was heartwarming, and the trek easier going, once he’d heard the good news that Hashem was going to accompany him for the journey: Yaakov’s heart lifted his legs and it became easy for him to walk onwards.  

Nachas Ruach
The Vilna Gaon indicates that every action that we do has the amazing capacity to draw down vital energy from above.  This vitality is meant to help us to do more good things. Although it imbues us with great inspiration, he stresses that this particular energy isn't remotely comfortable. 

It doesn't sit quietly. It gives us a good dose of the shpilkes, putting on the pressure until we’re encouraged to act again. And it doesn’t stop nudging us until we’ve received the right amount of pleasure earmarked for doing it. 

We can conclude from this that whether this descending energy is good or bad, when we actually see things through, we always receive a bit of nachas ruach, or comfort in the end. That’s how the Gaon explains Ben Azzai’s statement: “A mitzvah causes another mitzvah, and a wrongdoing affords another misdeed.” Whether your action is good or bad, you’re always going to receive some degree of satisfaction in the end. 

The greater our misdeed, the greater the negative energy that descends, adding more flames to our desire to do it again. 

But this is also true for good things. Our acts of kindness invite good energy to cascade from above, inspiring us to do more positive acts for ourselves and for others. And that’s rather satisfying!

Flee From Misdeeds
It’s difficult to hide from our mistakes. Wrongdoing works like a boomerang. What goes around comes around. Bad actions always come back to their original source. 

But what if you were to implement your power of return? 

The boomerang is scheduled to swing back to the very point of its release. One step in the direction of home and we’ve cleverly left that spot uninhabited. We simply won’t be there when the boomerang returns. 

What happens if you only think about throwing the boomerang? 

The Talmud states that to contemplate a misdeed is worse than actually committing it.  Even the vibrations of our thoughts can make an impact. They, too, somehow leave an indelible impression. 

The issue with a thought of this nature is that it most likely will inspire us to action.

In line with Yehuda Ben Teima, a wise person knows that when a thought floats up into the mind, it’s still within one’s grasp. It’s still in our control. Meaning, if we haven’t yet released the boomerang, then there’s no real need to sidestep it. 

Your best recourse is to drop it and run. 

But that particular thought’s going to follow us wherever we go unless we’ve already set in place a well-intended destination. The solution that Ben Azzai provides for this in the beginning of his mishnah is key. He offers: “Run to pursue a minor mitzvah, and flee from a misdeed.”  Running to do what may appear to be even a trivial mitzvah, leaves our misdeeds in the dust. 

>> Takeaways <<
	In order to seek shalom you must, “Remove yourself from bad” 
	Unless you’ve established your next destination from the start, you’re most likely to leap straight into the danger zone.
	Hashem’s Torah is your address, and as long as you keep it at the forefront of your mind, you’ll continue to walk the straight path, and your legs will be compelled to move you in the right direction.
	Your acts of kindness invite good energy to cascade from above, inspiring you to do more positive acts for yourself and for others
	A wise person knows that when a thought floats up into your mind, it’s still within your grasp to drop it and run. 

________________________________________

 
— Run Towards Yourself —

“Akavia ben Mahalalel would say: Reflect upon these three things and you won’t come into the hands of wrongdoing. Know from where you came, to where you’re going, and before Whom you’re destined to give a judgment and accounting.” 

When we leave an uncomfortable situation in a hurry, what we’re actually accomplishing is two-fold: 
	On one leg, we’re uprooting ourselves from our current position and leaving all of our Antagonist’s negative odds and ends behind. 
	On the other foot, we’re already heading to a new address which offers us hope for a brand new beginning.

This affords us the opportunity to leave our false sense of self in the dust while looking for a new and improved authentic version. Hashem was intending this very thing when he gave the following directive to Avraham Avinu, decreeing, “Lech Lecha!” 

With one fell swoop, Hashem told Avraham to both Go to yourself! and Leave yourself behind! 

It’s not easy picking oneself up and walking away from everything. It’s also a bit harsh to be asked to scrap our old home for a new one. Think of all the people and memories we’d be leaving behind. And who’s to say that we’re not going to run into our Antagonist along the way, anyhow?

It would be beneficial if we had a map which would keep us on track. One which would successfully point us out of the city, and unswervingly guide us towards our desired destination. 

We have deeper degrees of emotional attachment to the different places in which we’ve resided. When headed out on a spiritual journey, in order to slowly peel oneself away from familial locals, it’s helpful to review the wise steps that Hashem laid down for Avraham Avinu upon his own exit.

In order for Avraham to go find himself, he was first told to leave his country of origin, then his birthplace—the city he grew up in—and lastly, to step out of the door of his father’s house. 

It’s a bit mind boggling why Hashem appears to have flipped around the normal order of things. I’d have thought that starting out on one’s journey would first require removing oneself from one’s parents’ home. 

Would you have started with exiting the country? It’s likely that you already know plenty of other hot spots in your hometown that you’d first like to try. Maybe it’d be just as well to find yourself even closer to home. It’s possible that if our life’s task is to become the father or mother of an entire nation, or say, the whole world, maybe then we’d require an even greater disconnect. 

Or maybe the message is much simpler. Anytime we want to migrate to a new place, Hashem is just telling us that it’s wise to approach our destination in an educated way. 

That would require investigating things in the opposite order, i.e: 
	First, check to see if we can relate to the history and appreciate the topography of the intended country 
	Second, evaluate what we may have in common with the culture, and then 
	Third, choose a town. 
Once we’ve accomplished that, it’s much easier to go find a comfortable home for ourselves and our loved ones to live in.

But before I lead you on a wild goose chase, it’s important to note that Hashem’s real intention for Avraham was to go find his true purpose in life. Sometimes we have to step outside of our current selves in order to achieve this. Although separating oneself from one’s friends and family is not normally recommended, for those who need to totally disrupt their mindset, they may require taking serious action. In order for them to succeed, they may have to pick themselves up and physically leave the home in which they were raised. 

Either way, the journey requires that we make some sort of significant move. Hashem is simply trying to illustrate that making this shift affects us on many emotional levels. Meaning, the emotional ties that we have for our country are less entrenched than those we have for our province. We have a slightly deeper connection to our region, and have a greater attachment to the city in which we were raised. 

In short, the closer to home we are, the tighter the feelings and the more difficult it is to create a disconnect. When running away to go find our true selves, it’s not easy leaving our old familiar selves behind. Are you headed out to go find yourself any time soon? 

Wherever You Go, There You’ll Be 
It’s best to hold your horses. 

Before we go and divorce ourselves from the situation from which we’re fleeing, it’s important to make sure that we can confidently say that we’ve fully invested ourselves in our current place. But if we haven’t wholly tried, we’re most likely going to trip over the same old challenges that our Antagonist will provide for us in the future.

It’ll also be there when we arrive. Not only will it meet us at the door, but we’ll most likely come onto the scene feeling free and off the hook, open our bags, and realize that we actually brought all of our struggles and concerns along for the ride. 

Greener Pastures
“It’s not easy being green.” — Kermit the Frog

It’s not unusual for people to tumble into a grass-is-greener syndrome. When we’re feeling deficient, down, anxious or confused in our current place, it’s common to want to cast our eyes on the behaviors of others. This may even lead us to covet what they have. The grass starts to look greener on their side. 

I work with a number of young people who dream about dropping out of school in order to get a job. Not just any job, but they want to get a great big job, and this one promises to make them millions. Although they’re young and have very little life experience, they feel that their current “employment” leaves them much to be desired, and are quick to gravitate to what society stipulates as real—total success. 

Any sort of highfalutin dream would work better for them than having to remain in their current predicament. It doesn’t seem to matter how supportive their school or parents are trying to be, or if they don’t already feel themselves to be like a million bucks. They’ve somehow learned to manage their time by staring out the window at the nice green pastures across the street. 

They don’t realize that it isn’t any easier being green. If they’re really going to be a big shot business person someday, wouldn’t it be more reassuring that they’ve already achieved big shot student status today? Being a student is their current gig. Success now promises success later. An instituted habit of failure now will most likely lead to failure later.

Change Your Mazel 
Mazel comes from the Hebrew word nazel, fluidity. If you have a runny nose, you’re nozelet. If you're suffering from a leaky hose, your nozzle has probably come loose. 
The events that we experience in life are connected to a higher flow. Through the mazalot, the fiery spheres and stars that radiate from above, Hashem impacts and guides us as we walk our own path. 
He behaves as our beacon. He pours His great influence down upon us, supporting us in all of our endeavors. He uses this fluid energy to help us  complete our daily tasks. 
The great big balls of fire in the sky represent our relationship with destiny. Not only were they briefly in a fixed alignment when we were born, but we’re even capable of tapping into their creative energies today. This is how we draw down Hashem’s influence with every life decision.

It’s common to say a hearty mazel tov to our friends and family when congratulations are in order. On a joyous occasion, we seem to say, “Congrats! And may you have a stellar day!” 

What we truly hope to convey:
May your celestial bodies be in the perfect arrangement for you to receive everything that you need to fulfill your task for today! 

Our relationship to our mazel impacts us both physically and spiritually. It has the potential to both fill our cup with wisdom and line our pockets with riches. 

We learn from a teaching in the Yerushalmi Talmud that changing our location is so powerful that it has the capacity to realign our mazel, saying, “Change your place, change your mazel.”  

Some say that we can change our mazel by redirecting our thoughts and actions. 

Making efforts to be the person who we truly want to be is what changes our mazel for the better. The sages also say that we can enact change by having open dialogue with Hashem, and lending our goodwill to others. 

The more we strive to be who we truly are, the more specific are the tools that we’re going to have to pack along for the journey. It’s normal to beseech Hashem when we feel as if something's lacking. Another word for deficiency is poor, and that's what inspired Rabbi Yonatan to say, “Whoever fulfills the Torah in poverty, will ultimately fulfill it in wealth.”  

The greater our efforts to grow more into our authenticity, the more we merit to receive higher help. Starting off poor and simple leads you to receive the treasures necessary to stay on track. 

Our mazel echos as we stride forward. Like the speed of light, our actions travel heavenward. The light then descends, reflecting from on high. As we flow onward, Hashem bursts with love, overflowing and broadening our portion in the world. 

But there’s also an opinion that says that you can't change your mazel.

If that’s true, don’t fret, you still have recourse. We can actually rise above it. With acts of chesed, kind deeds, Avraham Avinu was able to distance himself and float above his own mazel. That’s why we consider him to be greater than Noach, who although happened to be the most upstanding character in his generation, was still unable to rise above his own destiny.

Avraham Avinu was able to go beyond the normal call of duty. 

The mazalot were given the job to control the physical world. But we can free ourselves from them. Since Hashem lifted Avraham above his, Rebbi Yochanan maintains, “Ein mazel l’Yisrael.”  When we walk our path, live according to our values, and fulfill our purpose in this world, we may alter the course of our mazel. 

We’re placed right back into the arms of Hashem, and it’s only He who guides us. 

A person who lives in accordance with their mazel is predestined to play out a certain role. This responsibility may have a myriad of implications. Leveraging it to our advantage really comes down to how we play our cards. It’s possible that traveling from one space to another, moving from one job to the next or entering a new relationship, will be the very shift that one needs to improve their current position in life. 

Change Your Place
Any place to which we attach ourselves becomes a receptacle for the inflow of our mazel. It’s not always true that the satellites above track us wherever we go. We need to be solidly grounded in order to capture their full influence.

In order to understand this concept, we need to take a peek at how we conduct ourselves at meal time. What’s considered proper etiquette at the table? When you sit down to eat a meal there’s a certain degree of continuity, unity, and connection to the place in which you’ve decided to sit and dine. 

Normally we thank Hashem at the end of the meal for the tasty morsels that He provided. If we happen to decide to change our place, get up and forget to bench—bless Hashem kindly and profusely for the tasty grub—then we’re required to return to wherever we began eating in order to say our thanks. 

That’s because we’re still attached to the place. We’re fully united and committed to being in that space. If we walk away and start a new meal in a brand new location, we’re even required to make a new blessing once we arrive. 

If our plan from the start is to eat our meal en route, and we intend to bench at a different location, we’re obviously not interested in grounding ourselves in the place in which we initially broke our bread. 

This means that we’re able to project with intention to be attached to our future destination. And the opportunity to thank Hashem won’t materialize until we’ve arrived at our newly intended place.

Yet if we’re already committed to our present space, and for whatever reason distanced ourselves from it, we’re bound to experience a loss. When we get up to leave, our relationship to the space suffers, and we’re likely to lose touch with our own whereabouts. 

If so, we’ve lost our power of distinction, and there’s no point to returning to bench in that location. We simply won’t be able to find our whereabouts again until we’ve stumbled upon ourselves sitting at another set table. 

>> Takeaways <<
	Hashem told Avraham to both Go to yourself! and Leave yourself behind! (Breishis, 12:1).
	If you haven’t fully invested yourself in the place from which you’re feeling, you’re most likely to trip over the same old challenges upon your arrival.
	It isn’t any easier being green.
	When you’re feeling deficient, down, anxious or confused in your current situation, it’s common to want to cast your eyes on the behaviors of others.
	You may change your mazel by having open dialogue with Hashem, and lending your goodwill to others.
	When you walk your own path, live according to your values, and fulfill your purpose in this world, the mazalot release their control over you, placing you right into the arms of Hashem, and it’s only He who guides you.

________________________________________

 
— Bare Bones —

Keep it Simple
"Hashem’s Torah is perfectly whole, returning the soul; Hashem’s Testimony [His Torah] is reliable, making the Simpleton wise."  

We’re the ones who complicate things. Striding forward requires putting one foot in front of the other—one step at a time. Baby steps allow us to accomplish one thing at a time. It’s just not possible to take on all of our struggles at once. The way to really start gaining traction is by keeping life simple.

In other words, it’s time to downsize.

That doesn’t require throwing away our worldly goods, but to narrow our focus upon fewer things. This is a wise move, and as King David indicates above: to become a wise person, we must start off wholly simple. Be the Simpleton!

Every simple step you take along your way brings joy to your heart and clarifies your eyes. Keeping life straightforward and bareboned is what allows us to see things for what they truly are.

Stay Relevant
Jews tend to treat the mitzvos differently in today’s world. 

It could be due to the vast amount of new mitzvah opportunities that have arisen thanks to our return home to the Land of Israel. It's like we're always itching for something new and refreshing to do. Maybe it’s representative of the digital, quick-click, access-everything online generation. Whatever the reason, people want things to be fresh and novel today. 

There was once a time when people preferred a more simple life. They even approached the doing of mitzvos more simplistically. Maybe it lacks the luster of today, but people were once more inclined to take the mitzvos that they were already doing, and just tried to do them better. 

They’d take their same old mitzvos and make an attempt to reawaken them. Making our mitzvos more vibrant requires performing them with a little more forethought, added feelings of greater purpose, and a bit more focused attention on Hashem. 

A common example that appears to have been grandfathered into today's practice is the extra scrutiny that people place on the first paragraph in benching. This is probably due to its more highlighted Torah obligation, making it the most essential blessing of them all. It may have a lot to do with the fact that Moshe stylized the paragraph in gratitude to the manna that Hashem gifted Israel while travelling through the desert. 

Similar to taking upon for yourself a New Year’s resolution (but actually sticking to it), you can give thanks to Hashem by deciding like others to bench with more clarity this year. I’m not suggesting to take on the whole thing, but as we said, often it’s enough to put all of our emphasis on the first paragraph. 

If this is still too much, you can join the individuals who’ve decided to limit their scope by just adding a bit more intention to their Shabbos benching. Centralizing our energies even once a week you’ll find to be a wise thing to do.

People report, “I’m spending a little more time on it, and trying to focus on each word.” The point is really to stop our rushing. Pay attention! It’s best to go over each word with a fine-tooth comb, and to borrow an idea from the Mishna Berura: to count each word as if we were to be counting coins.  

There’s nothing more practical than taking something that we’re already doing well, and just trying to make it better one step at a time. All the complicated stuff will then be allowed to fall by the wayside. 

The Simple Recipe
“He lays up sound wisdom for the upright, a shield for those who walk in simplicity.”  

The Maharal writes in his Passover Haggadah (the English Translation) that it’s crucial to keep the recipe simple.  He indicates that the lechem oni that we speak about at the beginning of the Passover Seder is usually referred to as poor bread or simple bread.

“Why would we call matza a poor person’s bread?” asks the Maharal.

Hashem reports the moment when Pharaoh announces that he’d no longer be providing the Jews with any more straw. We took a big hit. It was the main ingredient in the mortar used to build his thick headed walls. And then he had the gall to add, “There shall be no decrease in your work.” We were expected to work just as fast and as hard, but with the additional burden of gathering the straw! 

Bread is our staple, as well. And this begs the Maharal’s question: Pharaoh gave them bread to eat? He stresses the absurdity that lechem oni would be at all considered to be poor person’s bread. Why would we think poor and enslaved people would be candidates for receiving any measure of bread?

The Maharal prefers to focus more on the spiritual side of matza. It’s simple recipe is what makes it truly special. According to his understanding, Hashem refers to it as poor person’s bread with the specific intention to reveal its unique quality of being nivdal. Meaning, the recipe is so simple that it can only be considered something ethereal and spiritual nature. 

Matza is nivdal: it’s “separate” and “different” from the physical world. 

We left Egypt in haste with lechem oni. That indicates that this particularly flat bread has way more to do with speed and agility than sustenance. Hashem emphasized this by hastening our departure. Some say that we even left in the blink of an eye. 

The matza ingredients are simple. And simple moves. It’s quick, light, and it won’t slow us down. 

The less we’re carrying the more agile we may be. Adding yeast to the dough is a normal part of bread making. It causes it to become elastic and airy. It’s what blows it up. If we think to let it rest—ignore it—it’ll grow even bigger. According to the Maharal, it’s just an unnecessary extra that’s liable to just weigh us down. 

Matza’s recipe is poor and simple. There’s freedom in poverty and simplicity. Less is more. And too much extra can be too much of a burden. 

Life is complicated enough all on its own. Increasing the amount of ingredients adds unnecessary weight. It’s not worth feeling so overloaded. That said, it still takes a wise person to avoid getting trapped in our Antagonist’s overblown sticky dough. 

True freedom comes with simplicity. A free person is nimble. A quick leap and the clever person gets unstuck. It takes a simple mind to emerge from the muddy middle, to stand on one’s own two feet, and to continue striding forward. 

When we’ve got yeast on the brain, it’s time to hone ourselves down on the simple things, and to start walking on our own path. We accomplish this by focusing our energies on making something that we’re already good at just a little bit better. 

There’s simply no reason to change the recipe. 

Adding anything else might just sour the mix. 

Simple Therapy
It’s commonplace for the couples who come to visit me to have already worked through a long list of therapists. After inquiring about their therapeutic experiences, it’s become clear that there is one large issue that overshadows the others. 

Their therapists often suggest new ideas, tools, and additional exercises for them to do at home. Although I believe couples do have the wherewithal to work on their own, the exercises and activities that they receive sound far from practical.

After a few days or a week, they indicate how hard it is to carry out such a task. They describe it as a burden, and say things like: “It was too much for us” and “I didn’t get it” or “We just couldn’t get around to doing it.” 

As if they weren’t already suffering enough, they left it up to the experts to advise them to add more to the mix. There’s no doubt that therapists mean well. The activities that they give to their clients are even called practical exercises. It does make sense to stir in a bit of something to spice up the relationship. And doing activities together can push a couple to focus on one other. It may even just force them to get to know one another again.

Just be aware that outside-in activities, external systems, and new tools aren’t always a real plus. 

More is Better
It’s human nature to think: the bigger the better. 

The more complicated a recipe, the more appealing it looks. The more ornate a piece of jewelry, the more beautiful it appears. The more complex a problem, the easier it is for people to face.

People carry a complexity bias. The more complex the better!

But there’s a lot more to be said about simplicity. 

It’s what's relevant. It’s intrinsically practical. 

Adding to the recipe may negatively weigh us down, but tossing in just a little bit more of the basic ingredients can lead to a positive transformation. For example: spilling in more water instantly makes dough more sticky.

This can be applied to all of our relationships. Focusing on what already works helps to de-emphasize that which doesn’t, and at the same time makes what is working all the more effective. We might even be able to figure out the sticky point that each of us has in common.

The problem with fermentation is that it adds a souring and changes the original state of things. Although yeast can make things very tasty, it’s actually a form of rot. It makes things alcoholic, and that’s toxic. 

The opposite of fermentation is freshness. Instead of adding pollutants to our relationships, maintaining a simple recipe ought to keep them nicely crisp and fresh.

Sweat the Small Stuff
In Rabbi Shlomo Wolbe’s work, Alei Shor, he emplores everyone to take special care with each and every small action in their lives.  He urges: Sweat the small stuff, not the big stuff. 

This may require a total mental overhaul. 

R’ Wolbe indicates that the people who achieve the most in life are the ones who are willing to be stringent with the easier stuff. This infers that they’re more demanding when it comes to the lighter sounding mitzvos. 

In other words, when we treat that which we imagine to be light as if heavy, then that’s what we put our heart and sweat into. One of the jobs of the mitzvos is to reflect back to us what it is in life that we truly value. Depending on one’s personality, some values appear to be easier to actualize than others. The one’s that we’re already more attuned to, just happen to be the very one’s calling for improvement. 

We may gather a lot of information about a person by observing how they relate to others. Maybe you know someone who excels at the following positive attributes: 

	Give gratitude
	Actively listen
	Show care
	Quick to lend a hand
	Kind to others

People’s values tend to shine. Whether born with a proclivity for a particular attribute, or whether it’s been earned, it looks to others to be an integral part of their personality. On the surface, it may even look like it comes to them with ease.

There’s no greater investment than focusing on the values that we’re already good at, and just trying to make them better. Since they appear natural, they may seem small in our minds, but the very fact that we’re conscious of them is an indicator that they could use a good upgrade. “But I’m already good at it. I’m already being a kind and giving person. Shouldn’t I, instead, be focusing on the parts of my personality that I feel are really lacking,” one might say. That may also be true, but it’s not a very realistic goal to take on something brand new at the start. 

Note: There are values in which we know we’re deficient. Although it’s not practical to make them our current focus, it doesn’t mean that they’re being totally ignored. Focusing on bettering the values that comes easier, actually schleps along the ones that we feel are lacking. Just like the mitzvos, our values are all intertwined. 

The sages teach that one mitzvah contains all of the others. The effort a person makes to better a positive attribute, is bound to make a great impact on all of the others. What we value may not stand alone, but in order to make real progress, it’s essential to focus on only one at a time. 

Here are a few examples of personal values that people have reported to come natural and easy for them. And although they initially saw them as small in their eyes, lending them a tad bit more emphasis in life managed to make compelling shifts in their interpersonal relationships: 

	Saying thanks! 
	Asking permission before using someone else’s stuff.
	Returning phone calls. 
	Speaking respectfully to parents, teachers or friends.
	Showing up on time for appointments.
	Listening intently 

Here's what’s clever about focusing on the small stuff. 

We’re taking something that’s easy in our lives, and we’re deciding to work at it just a little bit harder. We’ve been granted with such amazing talents and abilities. We’ve been imbued with extraordinary gifts and strengths. We just need to focus a little bit more on them. The trick is to treat them with a little more severity. 

Taking what we’re already good at and making it a little bit better is our greatest investment.

Putting slight pressure on what’s already natural and easy for us to do permits us to grow organically. When we cultivate a small idea in this way, it eventually leads to huge results. We simply can’t know what sort of gift or reward might come out of each and every small deed. 

“This world, the world of action, all hangs on small actions,” maintains R’ Wolbe. 

R’ Wolbe proves his point by sharing a healthy example: When complaining about a particular ailment, it’s often wise to visit a doctor. We might not go right away, but most people are pretty good about making an appointment when fully convinced that feeling pained, anxious and disoriented demands special attention. 

After describing our experience to the doctor, they’ll diagnose the problem and prescribe a specific medication to relieve us of our symptoms. The doctor will not write a prescription for the strongest dosage right up front. Instead, they’ll start us off with the smallest degree of active ingredients as possible. 

When we visit the doctor in a few weeks, our prescription can certainly be reevaluated. And if necessary, more active ingredients may be safely added to the dosage. With every subsequent visit, the doctor may advise to add just a little bit more (or less) until this parable ends. And for those who still prefer to sweat the big stuff, R’ Wolbe exclaims, “If the doctor would have prescribed for you a large dosage at the beginning, it might just have killed you!” 

Small positive actions make huge shifts in life. All it takes is investing a little bit of ourselves a little bit every day. When we don’t keep things simple, we devote our precious time to unhealthy and unnecessary complexities. Making what we truly value just a little bit better, little by little, pulls us from the sticky depths of the muddy middle. 

Less is More
When we struggle in life, focusing on what we value isn’t the only route. Focusing on something that we enjoy doing also manages to work us out of the muddy middle. You may ask yourself, “What would I enjoy doing right now?” It’s important to seek something life-enriching. Maybe you have a hobby. What’s your favorite thing to do? 

Go and do it! Give yourself permission to nurture yourself. It’s time to have compassion and to do good by yourself. All it takes is to do a task that you already enjoy for about 5 minutes a day. 

Or 1-3 minutes, if 5 sounds like too much. 

It’s essential to choose a set time each day and stick to it. That means it’s still important to follow through even when we're not feeling it. 

In order to take strides and cover ground, it’s important to apply our power of establishing fixed times to all of our transformational endeavors. As you know, the Shulchan Aruch treats our duty to be kove’a itim l’Torah with the utmost stringency. We’re not even supposed to skip our scheduled learning time even if we might lose hard cash on account of it. 

I’m simply suggesting that we apply this very tool which allows us to master Hashem’s Torah in 1-3 minutes a day, to succeed in all walks of life. 

Cut Out Burnout
We grow by setting aside specific times for what we enjoy, and by being especially particular about completing the task. 

This comes with a warning: Don’t turn 3 minutes into an hour. Although it’s our plan from the start, stopping at the appointed time is a common struggle for most. It’s hard when our creative juices start flowing to set them aside. When we find ourselves having trouble putting our project down, a clever solution is to remind ourselves that this is surely a sign that we’re no longer creating it, but instead, it’s creating us.

When we push our 3 minutes into an hour (or even 15 minutes), we’re less likely to find the inspiration to do even 1 minute the very next day. 

That’s because we experience something called burnout. 

Our Antagonist doesn’t just kick us when we're down, it also looks to mislead us in times of great inspiration. It knows that we have the capacity to get overloaded with the things in life that bring us much joy and pleasure. It waits around looking for us to get excited and overly wrapped up in our own creative energy, and seeks to push us overboard. 

Not placing a limit on our creative flow is just asking for it to topple over. It’s hard to achieve anything when our creativity is spilling everywhere. The Antagonist knows us well, and nudges us along by coaxing, “I see that you’re really enjoying this project. I know you’ve passed your allotted time, but hey, don’t stop! Think about how much more you’d accomplish if you’d just give it a few more minutes.” 

And to our surprise, the following day, we feel rundown and overworked. The thought of getting back to the project is just too overwhelming. Spreading ourselves thin and shpritzing our creative energy in all directions simply weakens us. It’s what deters us from picking up even a finger the very next day.

In order to cut out burnout, it’s best to stick to our own given times and parameters. A person who’s interested in personal growth needs to establish boundaries and limits. It’s impossible to succeed when our creative energy lacks a proper container in which to catch the flow. 

Primary vs. Secondary
Unless we have our fingers on the proper guidebook or know the right person who may guide us along, it’s easy to lose track of what’s primary versus secondary in our lives. 

Placing all of our energy into what’s secondary doesn’t just take away from what’s truly important, but it also causes our creative flow to go to waste. It, too, leads to burnout. It’s super exhausting when our efforts are cultivating the less important things in life. 

It’s not always clear what should be taking precedence. 

That’s why it’s a real blessing to have someone in our life who’s able to reflect back to us what really matters. Focusing on what’s uniquely primary in our life allows us to accomplish more. And there’s no substitute for the feeling we get when knowing that our efforts aren’t for naught. 

Pursuing what’s primary in life also makes us lighter on our feet. That’s because we’re hyper focused on what actually deserves the center of our attention. Directing our creative energies towards what’s secondary just weighs us down. 

That’s why it's essential to find for ourselves a confidant. A person who’s willing to be our advocate. Their job is to reflect back to us what’s most vital in our life. There's no greater gift than learning how to pinpoint our own strengths and values, and to figure out with whom and to where our energies deserve our full devotion. 

When stuck in a secondary rut, a clever solution is to select one primary thing to focus on. Working to make it better lends us clarity, and quickly gets our legs into gear. With a guiding hand, we may pick up our legs, and zealously embark on our personal journey. 

Lending greater focus to what’s primary in life makes living all the more easy. And that’s because it’s something we’re already slated for. It’s something we’re good at. It’s what we intrinsically value. Imagining it to be better isn’t at all farfetched. 

A small daily investment promises us greater clarity, understanding, and the wherewithal to transform our lives for the better. The more we ponder it, and the better we direct it, the more it becomes our overflow. 

Overflow
When we bump into a person on the street and they share with us what’s been weighing on their mind, we’ve unwittingly stepped right into their overflow. 

We’ve stumbled upon what in life is truly bothering them.

When people verbalize their troubles at work or at home, or complain about a negative experience that they had (or are still having) with a friend, it should register for us that’s what’s currently occupying their mind. Whether aware of it or not, they’re publicizing a great deal of information. And the only reason why we’re privy to it—why we hear about it—is because it’s their most immediate concern. 

It’s their overflow. 

Our overflow is what we’re most concerned about. It’s what fills our heart and consumes our thoughts. Whether aware of it or not, we spend most of our time pondering it; turning it over and over, caring about it; constantly worrying, thinking and overthinking it, researching it; reading about it, discussing it; speaking and unloading it onto others. 

Day by day, hour by hour, minute by minute, we’ve been busy cultivating it. 

And if we don’t keep our lips sealed, we won’t be able to hide what’s been weighing on our minds. When we wag our lips, our cup is bound to spill over. The moment that we open our mouth, the truth of what’s really happening for us is revealed. The listener may immediately identify what we value in life, and by default, what we don’t. Our concerns, struggles and troubles are not a well hidden secret. 

There’s transparency to one’s overflow. 

What we do in our free time adds to the flow. Every piece of news that we scroll through, any amount of political analysis that we ingest, or the volume of late night television shows that many people tend to review, shape the content of what flows. 

Our greatest concerns are often things that have been transported from the outside-in. These externals have sculpted our thoughts and are fodder for our ideas. But as we’ve said before, the hottest conspiracy theories, tabloid news, and the stories of the rich and famous that many people tend to embrace, will remain unnoticed until the day that we open our lips and tell all. 

Wherever we invest ourselves and with whatever we decide to fill ourselves (whether it be positive or negative), we can be sure that it’s going to be converted directly into our overflow. 

>> Takeaways <<
	To become a wise person, you must start off wholly simple by being the Simpleton!
	There’s nothing more practical than taking something that you’re already good at, and just trying to make it better one step at a time.
	Simple moves. It’s quick, light, and it won’t slow you down. 
	Sweat the small stuff, not the big stuff. 
	Not placing a limit on your creative flow is just asking for it to spill asunder.
	Focussing on what’s primary in your life allows you to accomplish more, and makes you lighter on your feet.
	Whatever you decide to fill yourself, whether it be positive or negative, you can be sure that it’s going to be converted directly into your overflow. 



________________________________________

 
Section VI: Walk Your Own Path
________________________________________

Hillel would say: Be of the disciples of Aaron—a lover of shalom, a pursuer of peace.  

— Pursuit of Peace —

How do you pursue peace?
“Remove yourself from bad and hasten to do good, seek shalom and run after it.”  

According to King David, first we remove ourselves from the bad, then we do some good, and then we’re free to pursue shalom. 

Our ability to separate the bad from the good is indicative of our capacity to understand one thing from another. This is due to our power of distinction. And once we know in our heart of hearts what’s best for us, nothing should be able to impede us from running after shalom. 

The Slonimer Rebbe indicates that in our generation we should be interpreting King David’s words in a particularly refreshing way.  The Rebbe’s conviction is that removing ourselves from bad is no longer the best course of action. 

It’s just going to lead us further down a bad path. 

Negativity is super sticky, and the Rebbe was convinced that focusing on the bad will simply cause us to get even more entangled in the mess that plagues our minds. King David’s intention is to help us to free ourselves of the Antagonist’s influence, not to hurl us deeper into our negative thoughts and behaviors.

Focusing on the broken parts is human nature. We’re built to seek what’s lacking and deficient in the world, and strive to repair it. 

In order to change our world-out-there, we first need to begin transforming our world-in-here. But in line with the Rebbe, it doesn’t behoove us to start by investigating the full nature of our problems. Analysis has not only become passé in our time, but probing into our greatest concerns is a bad move, and should be seriously avoided. 

It’s not helpful to go over our issues with a fine-tooth comb. When heading out on our journey, it may be important to unpack our greatest concerns, but not for perusal. It’s much better just to lighten our step by removing the extra cargo. 

Dissecting our problems takes time and is a highly engaging activity. There’s a whole field of people who make money by helping people to do this. Although we may learn some very interesting information about ourselves in the process, we’re more likely to stumble, start feeling down, fall out of touch, and lose our whereabouts.

There’s nothing more frustrating than reaching out to others for help, and instead of being set free from our greatest concerns, we find ourselves sliding deeper into the muddle middle.

I spoke for months with a person who had been doing inner child work with a renowned Jerusalem therapist. He proved to be a pleasant, coherent, intelligent, and talented young fellow in his mid-twenties. He was super likable. 

He divulged to me early on that when he was eight years old he had experienced horrific abuse at the hands of a close family member. And although he had decided to forgive the person for his actions, he was still pretty wrapped up in his old feelings, and was trying very hard to repair his own self-image. 

His childhood trauma followed him wherever he went. In more stressful times, he lacked confidence and blamed his earlier abuse as the source for all of his self-doubt. This normal, articulate, and happy fellow would return home every other week thoroughly traumatized from his therapeutic experience. His body would shake, and his speech would stammer as he would relate his feelings to me, remarking, “I don’t know who I am anymore. I don’t know what I’m doing anymore. I’m completely lost!” 

Like any good friend, I reflected back to him, saying, “I notice when you come back from your therapy sessions, you appear to be a complete wreck. Do you think it’s really helping you? Are you sure this is the best treatment for you?”

“Oh yes. I’m learning so much about myself,” he professed. 

I shared with him how it’s organically impossible for a guy in his twenties to step back into an eight year olds brain. “Your memories are too distant. You’ve had a lifetime of experience. Your brain has grown and developed into an adult mind. You could never think yourself to be a child again. It’s physically impossible,” I reported.

The therapist was continuously throwing the poor fellow into his earliest trauma. Imagine! He was being catapulted into the muddy middle every other week. It pained me. But he showed great fortitude. 

Trauma builds character, and although he returned as a total nebach, he could always figure out on his own how to move on. He learned to utilize his own resources, and was forced to discover clever ways to remove himself from every sticky episode. 

Playing music was his refuge.

An important thing to remember about trauma is that it’s cyclical and compounding. When a person who’s experienced serious trauma in their past ends up having a traumatic day, both the initial trauma and every subsequent trauma resurfaces, leaving them with a heightened degree of psychic pain. 

We’re stuck reliving all of our traumas in the present moment. When catapulted into a cycle of darkness and confusion, there’s simply no room for good therapy to take place. This young man was being asked to step into the lion's den every other week. He was tossed into the darkness—into a boiling cauldron of awfulness. All in the name of therapy. Think of the horror. And afterwards, he’d come back for a friendly detox and to help him lick his wounds. 

It was just heartbreaking.

The Rebbe’s solution is novel. He suggests flipping around King David’s instructions, reading instead, “Remove yourself from bad by way of doing good.” In other words, when we seek to do what’s good for ourselves and for others, all the bad stuff will just fall by the wayside.  

Once we’re finally doing what’s in our best interests, we’re able to take pause and glance back, and wonder, “Where did all that nonsense disappeared to?” You may not even recognize what was once your greatest challenge as your own. 

It’ll be as if nonexistent. 

Rabbi Baruch Ashlag reports that when a person wants to remove themselves from the bad, they aren’t required to dispose of it on their own. And that’s because the sages teach that a person simply can't handle a bad thing on their own. He even goes as far to say that it’s life threatening!
 
Like the Slonimer, R’ Ashlag insists that harping on the bad never ends well. The effort we put forth to recognize how damaging and unhealthy our behavior is, may just end our life. That’s scary. 

What’s his solution? Get out of harm's way! “Remove yourself from the path of the arrow,” he says. Once we’ve stepped out of its nefarious way, we’re able to recognize the problem for what it truly is. Distancing oneself from the bad calms the mind and catapults us to solid ground. This peace of mind is what helps us to safely discern how it’s been damaging us all along. 

How do you create this necessary distance? By embracing goodness. Once we’re on the good path, the bad will quickly fall away. According to R’ Ashlag, this is what King David means by instructing us to do some good. 

That being said, there are times when being plagued by unwanted thoughts and bad actions is so overwhelming that we just need to get them off our chest. Like the story of the young fellow above. When we find it difficult to see our way through the shmutz, it’s high time to find a good friend who’s especially good at listening. 

And remember, it’s you who’s presenting your immediate concern. A good friend has no intention to pry, or to propel a person deeper into the middle of their muddiness. They want what’s best for you, too. Everyone knows that it’s simply impossible to pursue shalom when we’re missing a positive outlook. 

I’m not saying that speaking about our past is off limits. There are times when it’s essential to share an old story. Sharing a negative story, and feeling understood, is an effective way to start progressing forward. Sometimes we just need to let the negativity out. The wiser we’re to it, the quicker we begin to hear the damaging words that we speak. 

It’s important to become deeply attuned to the way that we’ve been choosing to tell our story. The story that we tell ourselves creates our reality. As long as we continue to accept our Antagonist’s unhealthy messages, we continue to do ourselves a great disservice. Its job is to muddle the perception we have of ourselves and the world around us. Changing the script to serve our best interests, changes our life for the better.

Your life is in your hands, and you get to tell your story the way you’ve always wanted it to be told.

>> Takeaways <<
	Your ability to separate the bad from the good is indicative of your capacity to understand one thing from another.
	Being hyper focused on the bad will simply cause you to get even more entangled. 
	The intention is to free yourself of your Antagonist’s influence, not to hurl you deeper into your negative thoughts and behaviors.
	Trauma is cyclical and compounding.
	Remove yourself from bad by way of doing good.
	When you start to share your negative story, and you start to hear the damaging words that you speak, you’ll become more attuned to the way that you’ve been choosing to tell it.
	Changing your story to serve your best interests, changes your reality for the better.

________________________________________

 
— Creating Shalom —

In order to gain strides on our negative thoughts, behaviors and feelings, we must first create shalom with our Antagonist. 

Before we begin, I’d like to clarify what I mean by asking a question: 

What’s bothering you?

It’s what you’re most concerned about. It’s what you wake up thinking about in the morning, it’s what’s gnawing at you throughout the day, and it’s what’s going through your mind while lying in bed at night. You may even find yourself talking or complaining about it to others. 

It’s your overflow.

Maybe you’re feeling anxious or down in the dumps, or lack impulse control. Are you struggling with making a decision? Are you drowning in emotions and not sure what to do with them? Maybe you’re sensing that life just isn’t going as planned.

Whatever it is that’s bothering you right now, put it into writing. It’s best to open a word document or find a notebook in order to jot things down for the following exercise. While you’re doing that, have in mind the following four guiding principles: 

1.	Choose One! You may be overwhelmed by a number of issues right now. Zero in on one of them. Maybe even pick the first one that enters your mind. You can always repeat this exercise with any of your other concerns as many times as necessary.

2.	Be Practical! Pick something that you’re already yearning to overcome, something that’s close to your heart. 

1.	Start Simple! If this is the first time you’re walking through these steps, you might want to save the more difficult issues for the next time around. Either way, walking your own path is courageous. 

3.	Be Relentless!This is your path and nobody else's. The point of this excercise is only to guide you and to help you to stick to it. 

Let’s begin right where you are (keep a note of your answers). 

What’s bothering you? 

If you would give your experience a name, what would you call it?

The power of imagery is an amazing tool for helping us walk our own path. Many moments in life just come and go, but we do have the power to retain them. We can picture meaningful scenes in our minds and then later retrieve them. That allows us to relive those memories whenever it suits us best.

Many of our experiences have left us with lasting impressions. It’s the negative events in our lives that tend to leave the most residue. Fortunately, these negative images are helpful in our efforts to demarcate the boundaries of the path that we are walking. 

A retelling of a negatively charged experience brings our story alive. We’re the author of our story. And our personal narrative allows important themes to rise to the surface that are relevant for us today. 

Take the time right now to think back and describe in detail what your experience was like when you last encountered your Antagonist. 

I’ve included some guiding questions to help you develop your story below, but if they feel too cumbersome, set them aside and allow your story to unfold on its own.

Your Antagonist Story

I last experienced my Antagonist when I was…

I was alone/together with…

Along with the emotional feelings, I also experienced: sweating / increased heart rate / tightness in chest / exhaustion / adrenaline rush / other…

All I could think about was: running away / crawling into a hole / putting up a fight / fulfilling my need / other…

What did I do? I did…

Other relevant features of my story…

Here-and-Now
It’s important to recall a negatively charged story because that's how we create a benchmark for ourselves. It’s a reminder, a time when we encountered our Antagonist, and things didn't really go to our liking. Maybe we gave into our fear, our anxiety, or our addiction. 

Maybe we felt ashamed or experienced regret. It can be a very confusing, painful, and stressful time. Our Antagonist has the power to leave us feeling disoriented and even estranged from ourselves. 

Being able to tap into this memory, to imagine ourselves telling our story in such detail, means that it’s still with us. It’s not just something that happened in the past. We’re still carrying it around with us. Our ability to describe it in the here-and-now means that it’s still alive. 

That makes it a useful resource. It’s not only the content of our story that matters but also the context. You may see certain aspects of your story that are relevant to what’s bothering you right now. If you didn’t catch them, go back and ponder the themes that surfaced in your Antagonist Story, and decide which of them are relevant to your situation today. 

Are there aspects of your story that appear to be relevant to your situation today? Please describe...

How long has this issue been bothering you?

Benefit Theory
I have a theory. I call it the Benefit Theory. If we’ve been carrying around an issue for a couple of weeks, a few months, or even years, we must be benefiting from it in some way. If we weren’t benefiting from it, we would have dropped it a long time ago. It would no longer be a part of our consciousness—our vocabulary. People don’t do anything unless they see a benefit in it.

The sages teach that a person doesn’t overstep their boundaries unless they know they’ll receive benefit from it.  If we’re still stuck in the muddy middle, and these particular thoughts and behaviors are still guiding our lives, I’d venture to say that we’re not just dealing with a smidgen of benefit residue, but that we’re still getting a great degree of benefit from them.

It’s just human nature. People don’t do things that they don’t benefit from. 

When we become more wise to it, and we’ve become conscious of the fact that this particular thought or behavior is no longer working for us, we’ll be able to develop a firm attitude towards our Antagonist. We heretofore won’t be so quick to summon it to our door, let alone invite it in. 

If it arrives, we’ll ignore it, or simply tell it to get lost. 

In line with Yehuda Ben Teima, we’ll leave it sitting on our porch, hinting to it that it no longer exists in our eyes. As long as it stays outside, it can’t enter our line of vision. When we start to refuse its entrance into our circle of consciousness, that’s when we know that we’ve placed ourselves back in the driver's seat. 

Twist in Perspective
Our Antagonist hijacks our identity. Our behaviors then become representative of who we think we are. We’ve probably already given each one of them a name. One may report, “I’m a coffee drinker” or “I’m a drug addict” or “I’m a thrill seeker” or “I’m a downer.”

But at the same time, people will complain, “But I can’t take it anymore, it’s killing me.” 

And I simply retort, “You need to convince me that you don’t want it in your life anymore because it really looks like you’re enjoying it. Nu! You’re doing it all the time.” 

Does that sound too controversial? It’s difficult to guide someone towards goodness if they’re too busy benefitting from being bad.

I spoke at length with a person addicted to crack. He was working as a landscaper. Apparently, landscaping is good work for an addict. Every month when he’d receive his paycheck, he’d cash it and spend the whole night smacked up on crack. He’d always call in sick the next day. 

Somehow the job could afford him to miss a day or two. He was deeply in love with a woman who was the mother of their child, but she told him he wasn’t invited to be a part of their lives. “It’s because I’m such a mess,” he said. 

He came to therapy in order to sort out his relationship with this woman and their child. He had no desire to curb his crack habit, but claimed that living life without them was his greatest struggle. 

Was he really making room for them in his life? He was too busy filling himself up with something else and it was destructive to boot. One day a month of smoke appeared to be more of a value to him than they were. 

When I asked him if this had anything to do with his crack habit, he made it very clear that he wasn’t willing to give up his one evening with the pipe.

So, too, with our cracked thoughts. When we find ourselves lost and confused, we may have an inkling to relinquish ourselves from the negativity. But truth be told, like Jack and his relationship with anxiety (above), we like to cling to them. We actually enjoy the emotional rush that they have to offer. 

You’re a passionate person. You want to feel alive! However bad our behaviors are, we just can’t help but want to hold on to those arousing feelings. Our negative thoughts have the earthly ability to keep us charged. They tend to remind us that we’re still alive and breathing. We may be actually drowning in them, but they look to be our lifesaver. 

Your Benefit Story
I’d like you to take a moment to imagine how you may be benefiting from continuing this particular behavior or thought pattern. Think of an instance when you gave into your Antagonist, but this time benefitted from doing so. 

Example: I spoke with a woman with severe anxiety who told me, “Before an exam, I really rely on those anxious sensations. The butterflies in my stomach actually give me the energy to focus on my thoughts. I always know I’ll do much better on a test when my stomach is all a mess.” 

Another example: A fellow who indicated that his marriage was crumbling as a result of his lifetime ritual of self-isolation, proudly said, “I’ve accomplished so much in my work. I’m well-published, and I’ve become a leader in my field because I isolate myself.”

It’s a real twist in perspective when we realize that it’s possible that we’ve been holding on to our greatest concerns, i.e. our anxieties, fears, shame, guilt, desires and doubts, because we might miss them, along with the benefits that they provide. 

I’ve included the following guiding questions below to help you elucidate your Benefit Story. Please describe a time when you gave into your Antagonist and how you benefited from doing so.

Once I experienced my Antagonist when I was…

I was alone/together with…

All I could think about was…

I benefited from giving into my Antagonist by…

Now that I know that I’m benefiting from this behavior or thought pattern, am I actually willing to stop experiencing it completely? Yes / No

If No, stop here (you’ve completed the walk your own path exercise). The positive benefits that you receive from maintaining your current relationship with your Antagonist appear to outweigh the negatives. You’re choosing to continue suffering from the negative consequences in order to receive those positive benefits. 

>> Takeaways <<
	You can picture meaningful scenes in your mind and then later retrieve them, allowing you to relive those memories whenever it suits you best.
	Describing your negative story in the here-and-now, allows you to identify important themes that are relevant for you today.
	If you’ve been carrying around this issue for a couple of weeks, a few months, or even years, you must be benefiting from it in some way.
	Once you’re conscious of the fact that this particular thought or behavior is no longer working for you, you’ll be able to develop a firm attitude towards your Antagonist.
	It’s a real twist in perspective when you realize that it’s possible that you’ve been holding on to your greatest concerns because you might miss them, along with the benefits that they provide. 

________________________________________

 
— Peace Treaty —
We may be at war with our Atagonist, but in line with the Slonimer, it doesn’t behoove us to attack our Antagonist head-on. In order to remove ourselves from its bad ways, we must first seek the good. The only way to serve everyone’s best interests in a heated relationship is to pursue shalom. Our ability to separate the good from the bad is by definition the first act to establishing shalom. The next step is a wise one: to purposely create a cease-fire that will allow you to establish shalom with your Antagonist according to your own terms.

Cease-Fire 
The moment that we give our Antagonist a name, we’re free to create an emotional disconnect. We do this by recognizing it for what it truly is—an entity in and of itself. This is the first step towards establishing a peace treaty with it. 

Shalom grants us the space, the freedom to see through its cunning schemes, and exposes the deceptive role that our Antagonist has been playing in our life’s story. 

Until now, it’s been cleverly drawing us in, bombarding us with its misleading messages. It’s been directing us off track. Its rhetoric has been convincing, and we’ve felt compelled to take its advice. 

But we no longer have to be tricked into thinking that it’s acting in our best interests. We don’t have to continue walking down the path that it’s been leading us. We can decide not to listen or to give in. We don’t have to continue living according to its script. We may author our own story and stipulate the role that we want our Antagonist play in our lives for the future. 

We no longer have to let it define who we are. 

Celebrate the fact that what’s been gnawing at you isn’t who you really are. It’s simply a useful tool to help you move forward as you walk your own path. 

We’ve been steadily working to arrive at this point. You’ve identified your Antagonist, labeled it, and started to distance yourself from it. You’ve taken the initial step necessary to establish shalom with it. Seize this moment to create a peace treaty on your own terms with your greatest adversary. 

It’s time to establish a cease-fire that will briefly end the conflict. Draft an agreement that will respect your need for self-determination. Freedom builds character. When you’re finished composing your accord, you’ll be able to boldly say, “You’re you, and I’m me. I have no influence over you, and you no longer have any influence over me.”

Your Peace Treaty
Shalom may only exist between two distinct and separate entities. It’s maintained by adhering to strict borders. Have the following four steps in mind as you begin writing your peace treaty:

1.	Create an image of your Antagonist in your mind. It can be in the form of a person, energy, or even an object. 

2.	Ponder your differences and appreciate its distinctiveness. 

3.	Initiate an open conversation with it and arrive at a mutual understanding. One that respects your need for self-determination. 

4.	While composing your narrative, make sure to describe in full detail your separate roles and responsibilities. Focus on your values. Keep in mind that you’re the author of your story. That means you have the last word. So don’t hesitate to write down all of your demands! 

1. I want to end the conflict because…

2. My demands are…

3. Our separate roles are…

4. I'm determined to keep the peace because... 

>> Takeaways <<
	The moment you can give your Antagonist a name, you’ll be able to create an emotional disconnect by recognizing it for what it truly is—an entity in and of itself.
	Shalom grants you the space, the freedom to see through its cunning schemes, and exposes the deceptive role that your Antagonist has been playing in your story. 
	You can author your own story and control whatever role your Antagonist is going to play in your personal narrative for the future.
	Establishing a cease-fire will end the conflict, and to drafting an agreement that respects your need for self-determination removes the influence it has on you.

________________________________________

 
— Building Confidence —

You’ve created a Peace Treaty with your Antagonist, and you’re no longer required to define yourself by the expectations and external messages that it has to offer. Now that you’re free from its influence, you may freely rewrite your story, and walk the path that you see before you. 
The Road to Confidence
One of the secrets to walking our own path is to be conscious of the fact that we’ve always been on our own path and that we continue to be on our own path. When feeling down, anxious, or out of control, we may perceive ourselves as being off track, but in truth, we haven’t veered away from our path at all. 

As we’ve clarified, our Antagonist clouds our mind, filling it with damaging thoughts and ideas. It manipulates us into feeling less grounded, leaving us with a faulty view of our path as being distant and hidden. 

But at this point you’ve become wiser to your Antagonist’s antics. You’ve started to see through the illusion. You see your path before you, and you’re putting your best foot forward. 

In line with King David, this doesn’t mean that we’re not going to stumble. Just be aware that there are people who, when they stumble, end up feeling unsure and wallow in their mistakes. We can be our own worst enemies. And then the Antagonist unleashes its message: “You slipped up again. You’ll never get it right. Why bother trying anymore.” 

Walking with confidence is what keeps us on track. It’s an attitude. It’s a value. Every opportunity to pull ourselves out of the muddy middle is a confidence builder. And as you continue to live according to what you truly value, it’s going to require a much thicker wall of deception to deter you.

Whether we feel sorry for ourselves or not, just like King David, we must always ask ourselves this essential question, “Okay. Here I am again. I’m stuck in this uncomfortable situation again, but now what? Where do I go from here?”

You’ve started to get a handle on your overflow. As we know, what we fill ourselves up with determines our path. It consumes our thoughts, and it directly affects our behavior. You get to choose with what to fill yourself. When we’re feeling stuck, it’s upon us to take pause to reflect, refill and redirect.

Your path is back in your own hands, and you’ve become more self-assured in your life, in your work and in your relationships. With eyes forward, you’re maintaining trajectory. You’re staying practical, being positive and keeping what you value at the forefront.

Heading Out
As we continue to stride forward, we tend to encounter many beginnings. Like with any journey, before we head out, it’s best to first pack our bags. But it’s impossible to bring everything we want if we’re being weighed down by unnecessary baggage. 

Take a moment right now to imagine yourself unpacking the extra weight and consciously leaving behind the external messages and behaviors that have been misleading you. 

Messages like “you’re incapable” or “this will never work” only get in the way. They slow us down. And if you don’t manage to discard them all, it’s okay. Most people aren’t able to unload their bags completely. It’s not always clear what to leave behind. 

The key to confidently navigating your own path is knowing what essentials to take along with you on your journey. Filling your bags with what you consider to be most meaningful is the path to putting your best foot forward. 

Take a moment to ask yourself what it is that you want to bring along with you. 

Stuffing our bags with what we value makes the journey worthwhile. Use this moment to pack your bags with the essentials of life. Such items may include: connection, individuality, security, and messages like “I have purpose” and “What I value actually matters.” 

Make sure to bring a load of confidence! It’s time, again, to stride forward. Take your next step by making a list of the values and positive messages that you treasure in life. Feel free to write them down. As we’ve said, it’s your story—you get to decide how to tell it. 

>> Takeaways <<
	When feeling down, anxious, or out of control, you may perceive yourself as being off track, but in truth, you haven’t veered away from your path at all.
	Every opportunity to pull yourself out of the muck is a confidence builder.
	Before you head out, make sure to stuff your bags with what you truly value.
	Tell your story on your own way.

________________________________________

 
 — Finale —

All the Wiser
You’ve become wiser to your Antagonist’s whims, and freed yourself from its influence. You’ve successfully established a peace treaty that better suits your interests, and tweaked your story to work to your own benefit. Please take a moment to rest easy for you’re finally standing on solid ground. 

You’ve earned it.

You’re finally in touch with your whereabouts. 

You’re no longer willing to deny yourself the pleasure of living according to who you truly are, and what you truly value. And I can’t stress this enough: As a tzelem Elokim, this means that you’re actually standing on your own two feet. You’ve taken great strides in a short time, your mind is clear and you see the path before you. 

But take it from me, before you decide to gaze upon what may lie ahead, it behooves you (and myself) to take this moment to breathe. 

None of us lack challenges. They gain our attention, and warrant our time and effort.  Yet they need to be governed. And in truth, that’s exactly what our Antagonist is truly hoping for. It wants us to control it, to guide it. It yearns to find its completion in us. 

And now you’re all the wiser for it. We’ve figured out a few things. We know that when we commit ourselves to taking a step forward, our next job is to zone-in on the task at hand.  We learned that the follow through doesn’t just refine us, it also defines us. And we can always take solace in the fact that whether we end up stumbling, again, deep into the muddy middle, that our issue is only a technical one. 

That means that there’s always a solution to our problem. 

The next time that you find yourself overtaken by fear, shame, anxiousness, or confusion, it shouldn’t take too long to identify your exact location. You’ll know, unequivocally, that you’re stuck amidst the same old muddy mess. And you’ll remember that your only recourse is to get your legs moving. 

You’ll make a run for it.

And when you’re once again standing on solid ground, you may be certain that your next step will be pointed in the right direction. 

This is a golden opportunity. You’re invited to become the best version of yourself that you can be! 

We’re all yearning for this. There’s nothing more rewarding than stepping into the sandals of the person who we’ve been seeking to be. This is a big deal. We all deserve a taste of what it means to be authentically ourselves. 

We’re hungry for it. And that’s a good thing. Since there are many facets to our personalities, we’ll never be lacking something on our plate that demands our attention.  

Although you're all the wiser, I’ll take a shot in the dark, and assume that there are a few other things about yourself that may be bothering you right now. Unlike the little piggy, you may not be so merry to find one toe still stuck in the middle of the mud. If so, you’re invited to go back and walk any one of your immediate concerns through the walk your own path exercise.

Remember to keep it relevant. Be the Simpleton! Sweat only the small stuff.

If you have any technical questions along the way, I suggest that you go back and reexamine the concepts, tools and guiding principles in this book. And for your benefit, you’re also welcome to take a gander at the Key Points that I’ve outlined by section below. 

It’s essential to take time to celebrate your achievements. We’ve made it out of the muddy middle! The next time we find ourselves stuck in the muck, we may remember the solid ground that we’re currently standing on. And know that when life gets sticky, you can always let your legs do the walking. You’ll find yourself on the way back home. 

________________________________________

>> Key Points <<
1. Your Antagonist

	You’re the major character in your story.
	Your Antagonist is an opposing force.
	It wants to see you struggle.
	It distorts your vision. 
	Blurs the lenses of how you view yourself and the world around you.
	It’s deceptive.
	You have your struggles.
	You’re already wiser in some ways, and less in others.
	Antagonist wants you to do the wrong thing.
	Identifying with its messages leads to feeling of emptiness, distress and tension.

 
SUMMARY
A. It’s a Bother
	You’ve probably already given what’s bothering you a name.
	A diagnostician breaks down behaviors and patterns into simple terms.
	You’ve placed labels upon yourself.
	Basing your life’s decisions on them sends you right into the muddy middle.
	When you’re are free of labels, you’re free to walk your own path.
	Your own values should be the basis of your life’s decisions.
	You may change your relationship, and write your own story.
	Understand your Antagonist’s ways, or it will continue to rule over you.

2. Clever or Wise

	The clever person gets their way out of bad situations (King David).
	The wise person avoids getting into sticky situations (Yehuda Ben Teima).

A. The Wise Person
Yehuda Ben Teima
1. The Eagle
	Eagle see from above from a bird’s-eye-view.
	You may avert your eyes from negativity.
	Looking at the wrong thing causes you to lose sight of yourself.
	You may zero in on what suits you best.
	A bird’s-eye-view lends you perspective.
	It helps you maintain trajectory along your path.
	Eyes are impressionable. External influences like foreign messages and expectations slip through your lenses.
	Demands that you close your eyes every day to negative messages.
	It’s proactive.
	Eyes are impressionable.

2. The Lion
	Walking your path demands perseverance.
	Your heart is home to inspiration, and choice: to walk down either a good path or a bad one.
	You're the king of the jungle!
	Yehuda Ben Teima believes that you may catch yourself enroute, question any rush of desire, and take charge.
	Making mistakes makes you wiser to the ways of your desires.

3. The Deer
	Legs mean action and they are built to do goodness.
	They’re what invite goodness into your life and into the lives of others.
	They’re what get you in and out of sticky situations.
	Focusing on what you truly value is always an invitation to approach life from the inside-out.
	A change of scenery may make you feel more secure.

4. The Leopard
	Although brazenness should normally be avoided, you must be shameless in the face of negative outside forces.
	A wise person has a strong constitution and holds a positive self-regard. 
	Antagonist distracts you from doing the wrong thing.
	It speaks to you in your own language.
	A leopard is solitary and wears blinders.
	In order to avoid getting in the muck, you must be unabashed in the face of adversity.

B. The Clever Person
King David
	Reverses Yehuda Ben Teima’s order of things.
	The path toward becoming a wise person is a clever one. 
	Only the wise may protect/redirect their eyes from eye-candy.
	King David is archetype for someone who always finds themselves in a sticky situation, and has clever method to free oneself of unhealthy desires, negative external influences and self-evading pursuits. 

1. Your Only Recourse
	Your thinking is already corrupted so your only recourse is to get your legs moving.
	Change your location, change your perspective.
	The key to becoming more cunning is to first be in touch with your whereabouts. 
	Self-awareness is what allows you to take pause to reflect, and redirect.
	Feel lost? Imagine the last place you stumbled. You’re still there. 
	Moving your legs activates your heart and then your eyes see clearly.
	Like you, King David’s always finding himself in the muddy middle.
	It’s time to speak to a spiritual doctor.

3. The Eagle-Eye
A. Bird’s-Eye-View
1. Corrective Lenses
	When your lenses are caked or there’s a vacuum, your perception becomes corrupted. 
	You’re made from Hashem’s first thought—His Torah.
	When all seems lost, it’s not really gone. It’s only been covered.

a. The Shmutz
	The lenses that you sport directly affect how you define yourself and engage the world around you.
	If you’ve been focused on externalities, your view of the world has most likely become compromised.
	It’s better to look within.

b. It’s Totally Crazy
	You have to have crazy thoughts to do anything wrong.
	Deficiency is at the heart of wrongdoing.
	What you see is what you get.
	In murky waters, people compensate by reaching for externals.

c. Crippling Quagmire 
	Walking someone else’s path and not your own is likened to living a life in the Netherworld.
	Antagonist covers your eyes with clay to create a partition or barrier between you and the world around you..
	Fools you into following a different path.
	In the darkest of places, King David looked to Hashem to drag him out.
	It’s easy to be whisked away by external forces.
	Not worth fighting your antagonist headon.
	Only with Hashem’s aid are you able to return to a clean bill of health. Call to Hashem.
	You’re either moving forwards or backwards.

d. World Corruption 
	Misdeeds and physical desire strain your eyes.
	Don’t ask to be tested.
e. A Bad Eye
	A bad eye propels you into exile.
	Jealousy is a prison.
	Eying what your friends with a crooked lense brings badness to you and to your friends. 
	Jealousy blinds you with a heavy darkness, and engenders a hatred of others.
	When you’re unhappy with your lot, you don’t even receive what your allotted.
	Trying to possess that which is outside of your own domain is humanity's downfall .
	Gazing upon another’s possessions leaves you conflicted.

f. Blind Spots
	The more shmutz that gets in the way, the more numerous your spots grow over time.
	Your view get distorted: What’s negative looks positive, and what looks positive is actually negative. 

g. A Wise Lense
	A wise person avert their eyes, and focuses on your best interests.
	Hashem’s chesed: Wakes you up and you see things clearly for the first time.
	Your field of perception is encumbered with the shmutz giving you a fresh start and a new perspective.
	It’s the most friendly thing to do.
	And it’s for all eyes to see.
	now see clearly, we hope that everyone's eyes will have clarity as well. And we also wish that everyone will view us as proper models for clarity, mercy, goodness and for doing acts of kindness.
	It’s a real blessing.
 
B. Your Whereabouts 
1. Power of Distinction
	Off balance? It’s because you’ve lost sight of your own limits.
	Important to differentiate the line between who you are and the world around you.

a. Being Myself Spectrum
	It’s difficult to harness your power of distinction while caught feeling sidelined.
	Tension, stress and discomfort that comes along with this is a call to action!
	You may always locate yourself somewhere along your very own Being Myself Spectrum. 
	There’s a particular aspect of yourself who doesn’t like being yourself.

b. Life Preserver 
	It’s nearly impossible to locate your whereabouts when stuck in preservation mode.
	Your struggle has become both your foe and your life preserver.

c. Power of Preservation
	Deny any part of yourself forms a gap between the different aspects of yourself, you deprive yourself of the ability to differentiate, and catapult yourself into a state of personal discord. 
	Reintegrated yourself with the rest of yourself, your anxiety will dissipate. 
	The moment you feel distressed and become anxious, your power of preservation quickly swoops in to the rescue.
	It’s a coping mechanism that may be applied to future events. You just have to guide it.

d. Been There, Done That
	Experience builds an attitude.
	Important to recognize your concern as having its own power.
	It’s your power of distinction that permits you to see your Antagonist for what it really is, and also lets you to see yourself as a whole being, and an entity of yourself. 
	Setting yourself apart is what transforms you into a real mensch.

C. Persona Non Grata
1. Outside-In
	Introjection: Adopting worldly views, and moving “the boundary of the world so far inside ourselves that there is almost nothing left of us.”
	You’re a nobody without a world of your own.

2. Inside-Out 
	Decisions and choices must start from within the inner chambers of your heart. 
	Working from the inside-out, inspires your heart to guide your eyes in a more favorable direction.
	Right messages to filter in, focus on the best in people, and begin to illustrate in your mind the necessary positive images which help you to reach your life’s goals. 
	An outside-in approach is superficial.
	Fighting directly against negative forces is reactive, not proactive.

4. Inside-In
	Assumes that you can’t move anyone further than you’ve moved yourself.
	This system is delivered from the inside to the inside. It’s a heart to heart.
	Personal transformation is a private matter. 

D. Patterns
	There are people who appear to keep on keeping on. But for them, moving on really just means that they’re just falling back into their old routine. 
1. Foreseeable Patterns 
	One action may be enough to inspire you to repeat it.
	The reward for one negative as another negative act.
	Choosing what’s in your best interest is choosing life!
	Any slip up form a gap between you and Hashem, and this opens you up to the negative influence of the outside world.
	Inertia: stuck in a negative flow.
	Tripping up is one thing, but enjoying it is another.

2. Power of Return
	Deciding not to repeat your action while in the same scenario returns you back to your initial state. You’re still kosher.
	A wise person knows that one overstep doesn’t have to mean that you’re bound to relive it.
	You can crack any habit by mobilizing your power of return. It’s just easier when negativity hasn't yet taken hold.

3. Habituation
	It takes two to three tries under the same condition for an action to take full hold.
	When you’ve begun to define yourself by it. That means for whatever reason you’ve started to own it—you’ve fully dedicated yourself to it. 

4. Themes
	Negative actions become the ruling theme when you’ve repeated them. It’s frustrating when you can’t seem to move on.
	Returning to a person’s norm may just be a part of an unhealthy cycle. This recycled theme is called organized chaos.

5. Your Norm
	There’s safety to routine. So why change?
	Actualizing negative thoughts makes it appear to be a part of who you are. It gives your life purpose.
	It’s become your point of reference, and basis for life’s decisions, and the lens through which you view your world and the world around you. 

6. Prophecy
	You’re the descendant of prophets.
	Your positive subconscious memories help you to maintain trajectory by shedding light onto your greatest tasks in life. 
	Prophetic imaginings lend you the uncanny ability to predict your future thoughts and actions. 
	You have the wherewithal to foresee the end results of your adopted patterns of discontent.
	The wise person set them aside, and appreciate what it means to live according to your own principles and values.
	It takes real fortitude to free yourself from established patterns.
	Negative patterns lose their lacquer over time and no longer appear to be negative.
	They take on new meaning and you may end up defining yourself in a new way.

7. The Third Link
	Because your unhealthy behavior is a direct result of your first actions, it makes it seem that there’s no end to it. You’re doomed to repeat it.
	But there’s a break. The second link is surely linked to the first, and the third is obviously connected to the second, but it’s clearly disassociated from the very first .
	The third link is your ticket out. You don’t have to be stuck feeling like just another link in the chain.
	The gap between the first and third link, turns the third action into a new animal. Any desire to continue your behavior is going to be solely based on a new and different reason. It’ll serve a new function. 
	It allows you to do the wise thing, and question, “Is continuing this action really in my best interests? Is it who I am?”
	You don’t have to be ruled by inertia. You can always stop to inquire, “Is it worth continuing with this particular behavior or thought pattern?” 
	you may unleash your power of imagery, and imagine yourself boldly snipping away at the chain with a pair of ethereal metal clippers. 

4. The Hungry Bear
A. The Beast Within 
	There’s a bear like beast that lives within you. It seeks to consume. It will not rest until it can swallow up everything in the universe.

1. Inner Hunger
	Your inner hunger cause you to go out on the prowl. It gives you cravings, your hungry bear takes hold, and your only concern is to fill the empty hole.
	“Hunger isn’t life itself,” says Rav Dessler. It’s just there to keep you alive.
	Your heart’s intentions can either be for the good or for the bad. 
	Once feeling hungry, you won’t just be hungry for now. You’ll also hunger for the future. 
	the more you attempt to indulge your cravings, the more intense your hunger will be. 

a. Your Lot
	Latching on to externals just means that you’re trying to extend your territory, your personal domain.
	Your efforts to explore outside of yourself are in vain. 
	You may find answers to your hungry energy by looking within.
	Your heart also yearns to reach beyond itself. It’s your natural inclination to want to do the right thing for yourself and for the people around you. 

b. Need for Attachment
	Your hunger is spiritual in nature.
	It’s there to inspire you to want to connect to something which is much greater than yourself. 
	You're yearning to cling to the infinite. 
	Doing acts of kindness for others satisfies your need for attachment. 
	Your Antagonist sugar-coats everything.

c. The Honeytrap
	Running after what your heart and eyes desire leads you astray.
	What your heart seeks, you shall find. It’s a self-fulfilling prophecy!
	Moshe’s telling us that once caught in the honeytrap, you’ll feel satiated, but only for a fleeting moment. 
	Your Antagonist exploits your strongest appetites, but it’s really just a bunch of empty calories.

B. Eye-Candy
	When you’re hyper focussed on your eyes, you can then in turn guard your heart, preventing you from dancing right into the store. 
	Moshe counseled us not to explore outside of ourselves because he knew that looking towards externals would cause us to go astray.
	The wise person is able to avert your eyes, and not to seek that which you desire. 
	When something catches your eye, it’s your heart that tells you: “You’ve gotta have it.” 

1. Insatiable
	It’s easy to judge yourself too harshly when you’ve given into your cravings.
	People are known to wallow in their mistakes. It’s a clever way to permit yourself to continue feeling down.
	You’re so used to it that you’ve probably forgotten why you started to relish it in the first place. 

2. Complacent 
	Laziness leads to complacency.
	When in a low place, your efforts to climb out are met with opposition.

3. A Brand New Routine
	A bad routine takes off the edge, but the relief is only short-lived. 
	It’s hard to change routine.
	You may leave those old routines behind by doing something good for yourself or a friend.
	Hashem will help you to see it to completion. 
	You’re now satiating your appetites with the good.
	Doing acts of kindness curbs your appetites, and in time, you’ll have transformed yourself into becoming a real mensch.

5. Mighty as a Lion
A. Roaring Outta Bed
	Every morning Hashem provides you with new clarity and gives your heart the courage to tackle your newly updated world.
	Thank Hashem for kindly rebooting your soul. 
	Gratitude is what speaks to the wisdom in your heart, awakening a spiritual hunger, permitting you to serve Hashem with all your might.
	 “A person should be mighty like a lion to stand up in the morning to serve their creator.”- Rav Yosef Caro

1. Commitment
	“Knowing is only half the battle.” - G.I. Joe
	Your heart is the pivotal place from which you commit to either go down a good path or a bad one.
	Life is about choices. 
	Making the right choice is what activates and actualizes the wisdom in your heart.
	In order to truly seize the day, you must still take the lead. 

2. King of the Beasts
	The morning is the most opportune time to take command of the day. 
	Hashem crowned you as the King of the Beasts! 
	With the right get-up-and-go, a leader’s day is bound to be filled with positive energy.
	Leaving your heart to it’s own tricks isn’t the wise way to go. It leads to making mistakes.
	It’s this additional shmutz which takes away from your efforts to pursue your goals for the day. 
	Your Antagonist tries to take advantage by encouraging inauthentic thoughts to arise from the vacuous space in your heart, seizing your mind and corrupting your vision. This is what leads to making mistakes.
	Engaging with your internal wisdom sets you free, and provides you with a shift in perspective.
	Must first mourn for the initial misemployment of the wisdom in your heart,a dn then speak to your heart and tell it to cry out to Hashem.

3. Power of Choice
	Hashem watches you closely, and yet at the same time, allows you to choose your own destiny.
	And your ability to choose between good or bad grants you the means to forge and maintain your own path.
	The power is in your hands to choose to either become lofty or lowly
	Choose life!
	It’s upon you to make good on the good, or R’ Tucazinsky puts it, it’s upon you to make your own good. 

B. Decisions 
	The moment that you make a decision, you’re certain to die of regret.
	It’s your Antagonist that makes you think that making a decision automatically excludes all the other options.

1. Loss of Possibility
	Any choice that you make cuts you immediately off from any other possibility. 
	One decision decision and you’re already mourning the Loss of Possibility. 

2. Black or White
	An outside-in approach is more simple because you may at-least define yourself by what you think you’re not.
	An inside-out approach requires that you already know what you’re packing: your personal strengths and what you truly value. 
	It doesn’t pay to be bashful when making educated decisions in life.
	Life is often fuzzy and grey, but your decisions must be an all or nothing! 
	Making a commitment means taking a stance. Putting up boundaries is a bold move.
	The regret that seeps in after making a decision only muddies your thoughts, andyou to start questioning who you are, and how you define yourself.
	Limits put up walls, but they also open doorways. A black or white decision unlocks the gateways to your greatest potentials.

3. Educated Decisions
	Do your own research, get professional advice, and listen to others share their own experiences. 
	Allow yourself a trial period when starting something new. Make sure it’s also black or white.
	You may always reevaluate things once you’ve reached your mark. 
	Educated decisions set up healthy boundaries. They’re like guardrails that help you maintain trajectory as you’re walking down your own path.

4. Blinders
	Good decisions demand that you wear blinders.
	The more sharp are your choices, the more clear your path will be.
	Not sticking to your commitments means that you haven’t truly committed yourself to carrying out the task.

5. Stick to It
	The three components that a wise person does to succeed in this world: 1) Be persistent. 2) Be consistent 3) Be sure to visualize yourself on the follow through. 
	Every time you stumble and pick yourself up it builds confidence.

6. Bold as a Leopard
A. Stiffnecked
	The way to handle a stiff- necked person is to match their toughness, to also be as hard as metal.

1. Too Bashful 
	A non-brazen person just seeks relaxation and contentment.
	Humble, modest, or timid people are too complacent.
	Brazen people are on fire! They don’t settle.

2. Stouthearted
	The mighty, powerful, and leopardlike. personality can be used for the good or for the bad. You can motivate it either to go against your grain, or to hold yourself tight to your path.
	Yehuda Ben Teima indicates that being unabashed in the face of your Antagonist’s opposition allows you to avoid it altogether.
	You may arouse your wise cardiac output by speaking to your heart. This sets up a proper roadblock, guarding you from stepping away from the path that continues before you. 
	A wise person is able to keep your wits about yourself even in the face of opposition.
	Imagine drawing a line between yourself and your Antagonist.
	Climbing out of the quagmire creates a certain degree of muscle memory. You’ve been educating your heart all along about the perils that you face at the hands of your Antagonist. 

3. Hardwired for It
	You have a knack for showing great chutzpah in the face of adversity.
	Brazenness was gifted to Israel allowing you to guard, maintain, and regain control over yourself.
	It takes a stubborn, stiff-necked, and obstinate personality to block out your Antagonist’s radically imposing agenda.

4. Pursuit of Wisdom
	You’ve been designed to develop a keen mindful discernment, to enact good judgment, and to be shrewd in order to acquire wisdom. It also helps to carry an unapologetic attitude. 
	The words of a brazen person are carcinogenic to some, but with proper intention, they may also be used to arouse, excite, motivate, inspire and inflame oneself to learn and to pursue wisdom.
	Hashem’s Torah like a blazing inferno. To properly receive it, you have to match it. You must also be on fire.

B. By Invitation Only
	Your Antagonist first appears at your doorway as a wayfarer. It then cleverly masks itself as a guest, and on the third visit, it somehow manages to transform itself into the master of your house.
	When you suddenly find yourself in conflict with your Antagonist, and that old negative behavior or thought pattern starts knocking you around—it’s because you invited it in.
	Not letting it in takes practice. Through trial and error you become more wise to it, but in order to do that, you must first become more clever about how you perceive it. 
	Developing a wise attitude towards it demands a certain degree of grit. When it comes to solicit again, the wise person in you will be able to look to the doorway in your mind and trumpet, “Go away! I’m tired of letting you in.”

1. Let it Be
	If you use something meant for the good in a bad way, your misdeed will follow you home. It perches itself next to your door, obsesses over you, and loiters there until you’ve gained mastery over it. 
	A wicked wild beast that’s just lurking, waiting to overpower you and drag you into its lair. On the contrary, the beast always appears to be unconcerned and is peacefully resting. 
	It desires you. You’ve stumbled, whet its appetite, and now it craves to be with you—it’s hungry for you.
	This teshuka depicts a kind of devotion or longing for love. It seeks to be loved and fulfilled by you.

2. Master It
	When you underestimate its power it becomes master over you. You feel the pangs of emptiness, and long to be near it. It shows up at your door, and you welcome it. You sent the invitation. You invited it into yourself. 

3. Counterattack
	When your self-doubt, anxiousness, obsessions, and your blindness start to flow inward, your power of preservation awakes. Your reaction is to get ready for the counterattack.
	Losing your whereabouts leaves you feeling vulnerable. You’re stuck in a fight or flight. If you attack, it’s you who you’re really attacking. It’s self-harm. 
	Your Antagonist may only achieve its real purpose in life when you rule over it, control it, and direct it.

4. It Ain't All bad
	People are born with both good and bad natures. One is not more dominant than the other. They both begin in a state of rest. 
	By ages 8 to 10 to begin educating children about goodness because eventually the badness is going to wake up. 
	It’s wise to beat it to the punch, and take prophylactic measures by teaching them early on how to use the good while leaving the bad behind.
	The only reason why your Antagonist awakens from its static, raw and inanimate position is because you water it, feed it, nurture it—empower it. You wake it up!

7. Quick as a Deer
	Your heart or your mind may awaken you to action, but it’s your legs that propel you towards your destination.
	Your legs are vehicles for doing good in this world.
	It’s possible to leave the bad in the dust by running towards goodness. 
	The path in which you wish to take, there you shall be led. Your legs vow to take you there.

A. Let Your Legs Do the Walking
1. Your Legs Take You There
	if you’re currently in a sticky situation, that means that both your heart and ability to make proper decisions have already been compromised. Leveraging your power of distinction, is no longer an option.
	When stuck in your Antagonist’s trap, speaking to your legs is your only way to jumpstart your heart. 
	Once your body’s mobile, the wisdom in your heart resuscitates, and then your legs guide you back on track.

B. Do Then Listen 
1. Feet first 
	Actions speak louder than words (KD).
	Before you pierce your lips, it’s best to first take a moment of silence, and your Antagonist will be tricked into thinking that you’re someone else. It’ll be tricked into reading you as a wise person.
	There are times when silence trumps transparency. When you remove yourself from view, you may quiet your mind, and place your thinking aside. 
	Then you may reset your compass, walk to your new destination, and safely revise, rescript and verbalize your narrative in a more positive light.

2. Shake a Leg
	Let your legs do all the talking. 
	The Do Then Listen, business approach: After boldly jumping into a new position, only then do you start to learn the ropes. You pick up the basics afterwards.
	You may leverage the same businesslike skill to spring yourself back into action. 
	When feeling paralyzed and stuck in a seemingly never- ending negative pattern, it’s often necessary to take such an extreme leap of faith.
	It lifts you off the ground, shifts your vantage point, and affords you a new perspective. 
	Once you’ve taken a step forward, you’re now in a position to guide other people to take a leap beyond the face of the unknown. 

3. Fear of the Unknown
	Do Then Listen: Overcoming the fear of the unknown is a part of your legacy. 

4. Get a Jump On
	Knowing what lies ahead with a bird’s-eye-view is a wise way to prepare before you head out on your journey.
	Avoid letting your Antagonist get muddled up in your actions from the get-go. It’ll just weigh you down, and your nature is already very heavy.
	In order to leap forward you’ll have to go against your own nature. With the right amount of enthusiasm, you can give yourself the lift necessary to get a jump on life. 
	Doing acts of kindness helps you to rise above your physical nature. This is just the boost that you need to empower yourself to continue to stride forward.
	You’re not expected to do this all on your own. You receive chizuk directly from Hashem.

5. Shpilkes 
	Maintaining a low level of shpilkes, impatience, helps you to stride forward.
	Life is never stagnant, you’re always in a state of transition. You’re either moving forward or slipping back. It’s in your best interests to always be moving towards greater spiritual heights.
	We bless the living, to go in shalom, as they move towards greater spiritual heights: transforming and perfecting yourself.
	Death is the loss of the treasure of life. That’s why we mourn. We lament the loss of the opportunity to continue striding forward. 

C. Run Away 
	Run away from your problems! 
	In order to seek shalom you must, “Remove yourself from bad.” 
	It’s important to know exactly where you’re headed. 

1. Danger Zone
	If you haven’t already decided on your new destination when leaving a bad situation, you’re most likely to jump feet first into the danger zone.
	The danger zone exists between one structured environment and another.
	Unless you’ve established your next destination from the start, you’re most likely to leap straight into the danger zone.

2. Eyes on the Prize
	Hashem’s Torah is your address, and as long as you keep it at the forefront of your mind, you’ll continue to walk the straight path, and your legs will be compelled to move you in the right direction.
	When you stumble, you can get back on track by reminding yourself of what’s important, meaningful and valuable in your life.
	Doing something positive, an act of kindness for another person, is the quickest route to reignite the wisdom in your heart. Once it’s awakened, your eyes will be better focused on the prize.
	Hashem's mitzvos keep you on trajectory.
	Hashem accompanies you on your journey.

3. Nachas Ruach
	Every action that you do draws down vital energy from above. This vitality helps you to do more things of the like. It doesn’t sit quietly. It puts on the pressure until you’re encouraged to act again.
	Whether this descending energy is good or bad, when you actually see things through, you always receive a bit of nachas ruach, or comfort in the end.
	Your acts of kindness invite good energy to cascade from above, inspiring you to do more positive acts for yourself and for others.

4. Flee From Misdeeds
	Badness works like a boomerang. One step in the direction of home and you’ve cleverly left that spot uninhabited. You simply won’t be there when the boomerang returns. 
	A wise person knows that when a thought floats up into your mind, it’s still within your grasp. It’s still in your control.
	Your best recourse is to drop it and run. 
	Running to do what may appear to be even a trivial mitzvah, leaves any misdeed in the dust. 

D. Run Towards Yourself
	Hashem told Avraham to both Go to yourself! and Leave yourself behind! (Breishis, 12:1).
	When you hightail it out of Dodge, what you’re actually accomplishing is two-fold. On one leg, you’re uprooting yourself from your current position and leaving all of your Antagonist’s negative odds and ends behind. On the other foot, you’re already heading to a new address which offers you hope for a brand new beginning.
	When you’re headed out on your spiritual journey, in order to slowly peel yourself away from your familial locals, it’s helpful to review the wise steps that Hashem laid down for Avraham Avinu upon his own exit: first told to leave his country of origin, then his birthplace—the city he grew up in—and lastly, to step out of the door of his father’s house. 
	The closer to home you are, the more difficult it is to create a disconnect.

1. Wherever You Go, There You’ll Be 
	Before you divorce yourself from the place from which you’re fleeing, it’s important to fully invested yourself in your current situation. If you haven’t wholly tried, you’re most likely to trip over the same old challenges upon your arrival.

2. Greener Pastures
	It isn’t any easier being green. Beware of the grass-is-greener syndrome. When you’re feeling deficient, down, anxious or confused in your current situation, it’s common to want to cast your eyes on the behaviors of others. This lead you to covet what they have, and the grass starts to look greener on their side. 

3. Change Your Mazel 
	The events that you experience in life are connected to a higher flow. Through the mazalot, the fiery spheres and stars that radiate from above.
	Hashem is your beacon.
	The great big balls of fire in the sky represent your relationship with destiny. Your relationship to your mazel impacts you both physically and spiritually. It has the potential to both fill your cup with wisdom and line your pockets with riches.
	You may change your mazel by having open dialogue with Hashem, and lending your goodwill to others. 
	When you walk your own path, live according to your values, and fulfill your purpose in this world, the mazalot release their control over you. You’re placed right back into the arms of Hashem, and it’s only He who guides you.

4. Change Your Place
	Any place to which you attach yourself becomes a receptacle for the inflow of your mazel.
	If you’re already committed to your present space, and for whatever reason distanced yourself from it, you’re bound to experience a loss. When you get up to leave, your relationship to the space suffers, and you’re likely to lose touch with your own whereabouts. And you’ve lost your power of distinction.

E. Bare Bones 
1. Keep it Simple
	We’re the ones who complicate things. 
	Baby steps allow you to accomplish one thing at a time. It’s just not possible to take on all of your struggles at once. 
	To become a wise person, you must start off wholly simple. So, be the Simpleton!

2. Stay Relevant
	People were once more inclined to take the mitzvos that they were already doing, and just tried to do them better.
	Mitzvos more vibrant requires performing them with a little more forethought, added feelings of greater purpose, and a bit more focused attention on Hashem. 
	Centralizing your energies even once a week you’ll find to be a wise thing to do.
	There’s nothing more practical than taking something that you’re already doing well, and just trying to make it better one step at a time. All the complicated stuff will then be allowed to fall by the wayside.

3. The Simple Recipe
	The matza ingredients are simple. And simple moves. It’s quick, light, and it won’t slow you down. 
	There’s freedom in poverty and simplicity. Less is more. And too much extra can be too much of a burden. Unnecessary extras just weigh you down. 
	True freedom comes with simplicity. A free person is knimble. A quick leap and the clever person gets unstuck.
	Walk your own path by focusing your energies on making something that you’re already good at just a little bit better.

4. Simple Therapy
	Outside-in activities, external systems, and new tools aren’t always a real plus. 

5. More is Better
	Instead of adding pollutants to your relationship, maintaining a simple recipe ought to keep it nicely crisp and fresh.

6. Sweat the Small Stuff
	Sweat the small stuff, not the big stuff.
	The people who achieve the most in life are the ones who are willing to be stringent with the easier stuff.
	When you treat that which you imagine to be light as if heavy, then that’s what you’ll be putting your heart and sweat into. 
	You’re taking something that’s easy in your life, and you’re deciding to work at it just a little bit harder. Taking what you’re already good at and making it a little bit better is your greatest investment.
	Putting slight pressure on what’s already natural and easy for you to do allows you to grow organically. When you cultivate a small idea in this way, it eventually leads to huge results. We simply can’t know what sort of gift or reward might come out of every small deed.
	This world, the world of action, all hangs on small actions.

7. Less is More
	If you’re struggling in your life, I’d ask you to find something you enjoy. Seek out something enriching. All it takes is to do a task that you already enjoy for about 3-5 minutes a day. 
	It’s important to stick to it even when you're not feeling it.
	It’s important to apply your power of establishing fixed times to all of your transformational endeavors.

8. Cut Out Burnout
	Don’t turn 3 minutes into an hour (or even 15 minutes), you’ll see, you won’t find much inspiration to do even 1 minute the very next day. You’re experiencing what’s called, burnout. 
	Your Antagonist doesn’t just kick you when you're down, it also looks to mislead you in times of great inspiration. It knows that you have the capacity to get overloaded with the things in life that bring you much joy and pleasure.
	Not placing a limit on your creative flow is just asking for it to topple over. It’s hard to achieve anything when your creativity is being spilled everywhere.
	In order to cut out burnout, it’s best to stick to your own given times and parameters. Personal demands establish limits.

9. Primary vs. Secondary
	Placing all of your energy into what’s secondary doesn’t just take away from what’s truly important, but it also causes your creative flow to spill asunder. It, too, leads to burnout. 
	Focussing on what’s primary in your life allows you to accomplish more, and makes you lighter on your feet.
	That’s because you’re focussed on what actually deserves your center of attention. Directing your creative energies towards what’s secondary just weighs you down. 
	It's essential to find for yourself a confidant. A person who’s willing to be your advocate. Their job is to reflect back to you what’s most vital in your life.

10. Overflow
	Your overflow is most immediate concerned. It fills your heart and consumes your thoughts. When you verbalize them, the listener immediately knows what you value in life, and by default, what you don’t. 
	What you do in your free time helps shape your flow.
	Whatever you decide to fill yourself, whether it be positive or negative, you can be sure that it’s going to be converted directly into your overflow. 

8. Pursuit of Shalom
A. Pursuing Shalom
	First you remove yourself from the bad, then you do some good, and then you’re free to pursue shalom. 
	Your ability to separate the bad from the good is indicative of your capacity to understand one thing from another. This is due to your power of distinction.
	Knowing in your heart of hearts what’s best for you, nothing should be able to impede you from running after shalom. 
	Negativity is super sticky, and focussing on the bad will simply cause you to get even more entangled into it. 
	The intention is to free yourself of your Antagonist’s influence, not to hurle you deeper into your negative thoughts and behaviors. Doing so will more likely lead you to stumble, start feeling down, fall out of touch, and lose your whereabouts.
	An important thing to remember about trauma is that it’s cyclical and compounding. When a person who’s experienced serious trauma in their past ends up having a traumatic day, both the initial trauma and every subsequent trauma resurfaces, leaving them with a heightened degree of psychic pain. They’re stuck reliving all of their traumas in the present moment.
	The Rebbe’s suggestion: Remove yourself from bad by way of doing good
	Don’t go it alone. It could be life threatening.
	Sharing your negative story, and feeling understood, are effective ways to start striding forward. When you become wiser to it, you’ll start to hear the damaging words that you speak. You’ll become more attuned to the way that you’ve been choosing to tell your story. 

B. Creating Shalom
	To gain strides on your negative thoughts, behaviors and feelings, you must first create shalom with your Antagonist. 
	When writing about what’s bothering you make sure to follow the four guiding principles: 
1. Choose One!
2. Be Practical! 
3. Start Simple! 
4. Be Relentless!

	The power of imagery is an amazing tool for helping you walk your own path. You can picture meaningful scenes in your mind and then later retrieve them. That allows you to relive those memories whenever it suits you best.
	It’s the negative events in your life that tend to leave the most residue. Fortunately for you, these negative images are helpful in your efforts to demarcate the boundaries of the path that you are walking. 
	A retelling of a negatively charged experience brings your story alive. You’re the author of your story. And your personal narrative allows important themes to rise to the surface that are relevant for you today. 

1. Your Antagonist Story
a. Here-and-Now
	It’s important to recall a negatively charged story because that's how you create a benchmark for yourself. It’s a reminder, a time when you encountered your Antagonist, and things didn't really go to your liking.
	Being able to tap into this memory, to imagine yourself telling your story in such detail, means that it’s still with you. It’s not just something that happened in the past. You’re still carrying it around with you. Your ability to describe it in the here-and-now means that it’s still alive.
	That makes it a useful resource. You may see certain aspects of your Antagonist Story, and decide which of them are relevant to your situation today. 

2. Benefit Theory
	If you’ve been carrying around this issue for a couple of weeks, a few months, or even years, you must be benefiting from it in some way. If you weren’t benefiting from it, you would have dropped it a long time ago. People don’t (hold onto) do things that they don’t benefit from.
	When you become more wise to it, and you’ve become conscious of the fact that this particular thought or behavior is no longer working for you, you’ll be able to develop a firm attitude towards your Antagonist.
	When you start to refuse your Antagonist entrance into your circle of consciousness, that’s when you know that you’ve placed yourself back in the driver's seat. 

a. Twist in Perspective
	When you find yourself lost and confused, you may have an inkling to relinquish yourself from the negativity. But truth be told, you like to cling to them. You actually enjoy the emotional rush that they have to offer.
	They tend to remind you that you’re still a living and breathing organism. You may be actually drowning in them, but they look to be your lifesaver. 

3. Your Benefit Story
	It’s a real twist in perspective when you realize that it’s possible that you’ve been holding on to your greatest concerns because you might miss them, along with the benefits that they provide. 

C. Peace Treaty
1. Cease-Fire 
	The moment you can give your Antonist a name, you’ll be able to create an emotional disconnect by recognizing it for what it truly is—an entity in and of itself. This is your first step towards establishing a peace treaty with it.
	Shalom grants you the space, the freedom to see through its cunning schemes, and exposes the deceptive role that your Antagonist has been playing in your story. 
	You no longer have to let it define who you are. You can author your own story and control whatever role your Antagonist isgoing to play in your personal narrative for the future. 
	What’s bothering you is simply a useful tool to help you walk your own path. 
	Establishing a cease-fire will end the conflict, and to drafting an agreement that respects your need for self-determination removes the influence it has on you.

9. Building Confidence
A. The Road to Confidence
	One of the secrets to walking your own path is to be conscious of the fact that you’ve always been on your own path and that you’ll continue to be on your own path. When feeling down, anxious, or out of control, you may perceive yourself as being off track, but in truth, you haven’t veered away from your path at all.
	Walking with confidence is what keeps you on track. It’s an attitude. Every opportunity to pull yourself out of the muck is a confidence builder. And as you continue to live according to what you truly value, it’s going to require a much thicker wall of deception to deter you.
	As you continue to stride forward, you’re going to encounter many beginnings.
	You may imagine yourself unpacking the extra weight and consciously leaving behind the external messages and behaviors that have been misleading you. 



To others:
Ask before using someone else’s things. “May I use your pen?” “Can I play with your tablet?” “Do you mind if I sit in your chair?” “May I sit on your bed?” 

Showing gratitude. Some people naturally give thanks. They send a note or little gift when they receive an act of kindness. Some show their gratitude by sending a note or little gift. But do are they equally as kind to themselves? 

Speak respectfully to their parents. But what about teachers, friends? 

Practice active listening. Some people understand that people want to feel understood. When people need to get things off their chest, they know it doesn’t always mean that they’re fishing for a solution. 

Returning phone calls

Showing up on time for appointments. Everyone benefits. Set you alarm with enough time to get there. Include travel time. Set your clock 10 to 15 minutes earlier than the correct time. 

Practice active listening
Returning phone calls

Easier mitzvos:
Washing one’s hands in the morning, after the bathroom, in order make a meal on bread?

How to make it better: Learn the laws and different customs. Prepare a small change purse with coins all ready for giving. 
Asher yatzer
Give to the needy
